Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: An ocean apart? Comparing transatlantic responses to the financial crisis,11-09-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,2094,"<p>This conference has examined in detail how policy authorities on both sides of the Atlantic have reacted to the financial crisis. I won’t consider in depth the events of the past two years. Let me just say that central banks on both sides of the Atlantic have responded swiftly and decisively, especially since September of last year, working very closely together, even to the point of coordinating some of their actions. Indeed, you doubtless remember that the first interest rate reduction in the easing cycle, on 8 October 2008, was a coordinated move by a number of major central banks. Market interest rates are now at very similar levels. For instance, the money market interest rates at the twelve-month horizon both in the US and the euro area are currently just below 1.3%. [1]Central banks on both sides of the Atlantic have also resorted to a number of non-standard measures to provide additional support and stimulus to their respective economies. The choice and design of those measures reflects the structural characteristics of those economies. The non-standard measures implemented by the ECB have focused primarily on banks, as banks are the main source of funding in the euro area economy. In the US, however, market-based financing plays a more important role. The ECB’s framework for non-conventional measures comprises five main building blocks: meeting in full the banks’ liquidity requests at a fixed rate; expanding the list of assets eligible as collateral; lengthening the maturities of long-term refinancing operations; providing liquidity in foreign currencies; and, since July, supporting the financial market by making outright purchases of covered bonds.These measures are by now well known. We consider that they have achieved the desired objectives, in particular by reducing the spreads in the money market, flattening the yield curve over the short-term horizon and restarting the market for covered bonds – an important instrument through which banks finance themselves. So much for recent measures. Today, though, I’d like to look ahead and talk about a topic which has been widely discussed at recent international meetings: the exit strategy. This strategy sets a course for progressively reversing the policy measures that were implemented in recent months, i.e. the interest rate levels and non-standard instruments.Let me make it quite clear: this is not – yet – the time to implement the exit strategy. We clearly stated our view last week that the level of interest rate is appropriate, and we decided to conduct another one-year refinancing operation at the MRO rate (1%) with full allotment. But it’s critical to have a well thought-out exit strategy, because markets have to realise that the current policy is temporary and will be reversed when it is no longer appropriate, in particular when risks to price stability re-emerge and conditions in financial markets have improved. As far as the euro area is concerned, the primary goal of monetary policy remains price stability; and the ECB will do whatever is needed to carry out its mandate. Inflation expectations over the medium term have to remain well anchored. This is essential to ensure that long-term interest rates remain low, thereby supporting the economic recovery.Having an exit strategy is thus an act of responsibility for a central bank. Drawing up an exit strategy entails two questions above all: how? and when? I won’t touch upon the how – the instruments – as both Chairman Bernanke and President Trichet have examined this particular question recently. [2] Instead, I will address the issue of the when from an analytical point of view. The concrete implementation will depend on many imponderables, not least the prospects for economic recovery and for the stabilisation of financial markets – and those prospects are fraught with uncertainty. I intend to discuss a few issues that – in my view – central banks will have to consider when taking the decision to exit. This will show how complex and difficult that decision is going to be. My analysis does not pretend to be exhaustive, but in my view the following five issues demand our full attention.One issue is reversibility. Once the decision has been taken, we can’t easily go back on it. This seems pretty obvious, but it has some deeper implications. Let me explain.If the decision to exit is taken too late and monetary expansion continues for too long, fresh seeds of instability in the financial sector are sown. On the other hand, if the decision is taken too early, the economic recovery might be undermined. Mistakes in the timing, both premature and tardy, (what I would call type I and type II errors) have been made in the past.The solution is to do it right, obviously.Some might think that these errors are not so worrying because they can be remedied while the exit policy is being implemented. If the decision to exit has been taken too early, for instance, the central bank might slow things down. If, however, the decision has been taken too late, the exit can be speeded up. It sounds nice, but is a bit too easy.Why? Because the decision to exit is bound to have an impact on agents’ interest rate expectations throughout the whole yield curve, and lead to substantial portfolio reallocations. This is desirable, and inevitable, as the purpose of the exit strategy is indeed to change the behaviour of the private sector. But if the adjustment in expectations is large, it can lead to disruptions that affect financial stability and in turn jeopardise the sustainability of the whole exit strategy. In particular, any late exit which needs to be accelerated could produce unexpected shocks, for instance in the form of losses in the fixed income market which could hamper attempts by financial institutions to progressively regain access to the funding market. The effects of such a delay might lead to a prolongation of the non-standard measures which were supposed to be phased out. Remember the 1994 episode, when a mere 25-basis-point increase in the Fed funds rate gave rise to major losses in the bond market (reflecting the fact that it was probably a bit too late). The losses then constrained the future moves, which had to be relatively more gradualistic. The second issue relates to the uncertainties surrounding the analytical framework that central banks have at their disposal in order to decide on the optimal interest rate path. Ideally, the stance of monetary policy should be calibrated in such a way as to avoid an implicit easing of monetary conditions as the economy recovers. This implies that the interest rate should be raised as the economy starts growing above its potential rate and as the output gap starts closing. The problem with this framework is that it is very difficult to estimate potential growth and the size of the output gap, especially after a shock like the one experienced over the last two years. Looking at the past, the major policy mistakes have been made as a result of overestimating potential growth and the size of the output gap, in particular during a recovery. This has led monetary policy to be overly activist and has delayed the tightening phase, thus fuelling financial instability. The two-pillar strategy of the ECB has helped to reduce this type of risk, as monetary and credit aggregates have been used as indicators of a strengthened economy, while inflationary pressures were still subdued. In the current phase, we might have to take into consideration the fact that the ongoing process of de-leveraging in the financial sector, which is likely to take place for some time as a result of the correction of the previous credit bubble, might affect the signalling content of money and credit aggregates.To be sure, the tightening phase cannot wait until inflation materialises, but will have to precede it. This is even more the case this time around, given the very low level to which interest rates have been reduced, and the distance from the steady state level that will need to be attained. The latter is in itself very difficult to determine, given the uncertainties about some of the longer-term developments in the economy. This will, as usual, present some comunication challenges, such as having to answer the question commonly put to central bankers under these circumstances: “Why are you raising interest rates if there is no inflation?”The pace of the tightening will obviously depend on the underlying conditions, in particular the speed of the recovery. Given the uncertainties, it would be inappropriate to commit to any specific path ex ante.Another issue to take into account is the exit strategy from fiscal policy. I will not dwell on this issue, which is undoubtedly a challenging one per se. But there is a link with the exit from monetary policy and it will have to be considered. In particular, the more delayed the fiscal exit, ceteris paribus, the more the monetary policy exit might have to be brought forward. Indeed, given the level of the debt accumulated in most advanced economies, any delay in the fiscal exit is likely to have an effect on inflation expectations, and may even disanchor them. This is a risk that monetary policy cannot take, as it would undermine its overall strategy.On the subject of inflation expectations, allow me to digress briefly. Inflation expectations are an important indicator for central banks, as they reflect their credibility in achieving price stability. However, recent experience suggests that central banks should not be too complacent, even when expectations appear to be anchored, as the private sector might not always be a good predictor of future developments. Over the previous cycle, inflation expectations seemed to be well anchored, but partially concealed the build-up of asset market instability and longer-run threats to price stability. Well-anchored inflation expectations are a necessary condition for an appropriate monetary policy, but not a sufficient one.Let me touch on a final issue, related to financial stability. The exit strategy for the interest rate policy will be defined on the basis of the primary objective: price stability. In this respect, financial stability can only be a secondary objective. If it were given the same priority as price stability, the latter would obviously be compromised. The exit from the non-standard measures is likely to be linked to the state of the financial markets, and in this respect can partly be disconnected from the interest rate policy. Given the design of the non-standard instruments implemented by the ECB, the exit from those instruments can take place before or after the interest rate decision, without major effects on it. However, if at the time of the exit a number of financial institutions are still addicted to central bank liquidity, the transmission channel of monetary policy might be impaired. It is not the central bank’s task to continue providing liquidity to financial institutions which are not able to stand on their own feet, once the turmoil is over. It is the responsibility of the supervisory authorities, and ultimately of Treasuries, to address the problems of these addicted banks as soon as possible, through recapitalisation and restructuring, as appropriate, and to ensure that all banks in their jurisdictions can stand on their own feet even without the central bank’s facilities.Let me conclude.I have tried to identify some of the issues which will have to be considered in implementing the exit strategy on both sides of the Atlantic. My observations have been purely analytical, and do not aim to provide any insight into specific monetary policy decisions over the next few months. My purpose was to explain parts of the analytical framework in which central banks will have to operate, on this and that side of the Atlantic.Just like the entry, the exit will also call for close interaction between the monetary authorities. This might not necessarily mean coordinated action or similar measures, given the different situations. However, the challenges ahead are quite similar. Ultimately, if we want to avoid ‘being too late’ or ‘being too early’, the only solution is to ‘be right on time’. And this is what we are committed to doing.[1] On Friday 4 September 2009, three, six and 12 month rates in the US (LIBOR) stood at 0.31%, 0.71% and 1.29%. The corresponding rates in the euro area (EURIBOR) were 0.80%, 1.07% and 1.28%.[2] See the speech by ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet, “The ECB’s exit strategy”, Frankfurt, 4 September 2009, and testimony by Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke before the Committee on Financial Services, US House of Representatives, Washington, D.C., 21 July 2009Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",confer examin detail polici author side atlant react financi crisi won consid depth event past two year let say central bank side atlant respond swift decis especi sinc septemb last year work close togeth even point coordin action inde doubtless rememb first interest rate reduct eas cycl octob coordin move number major central bank market interest rate similar level instanc money market interest rate twelvemonth horizon us euro area current central bank side atlant also resort number nonstandard measur provid addit support stimulus respect economi choic design measur reflect structur characterist economi nonstandard measur implement ecb focus primarili bank bank main sourc fund euro area economi us howev marketbas financ play import role ecb framework nonconvent measur compris five main build block meet full bank liquid request fix rate expand list asset elig collater lengthen matur longterm refinanc oper provid liquid foreign currenc sinc juli support financi market make outright purchas cover bond measur well known consid achiev desir object particular reduc spread money market flatten yield curv shortterm horizon restart market cover bond import instrument bank financ much recent measur today though d like look ahead talk topic wide discuss recent intern meet exit strategi strategi set cours progress revers polici measur implement recent month e interest rate level nonstandard instrument let make quit clear yet time implement exit strategi clear state view last week level interest rate appropri decid conduct anoth oneyear refinanc oper mro rate full allot critic well thoughtout exit strategi market realis current polici temporari revers longer appropri particular risk price stabil reemerg condit financi market improv far euro area concern primari goal monetari polici remain price stabil ecb whatev need carri mandat inflat expect medium term remain well anchor essenti ensur longterm interest rate remain low therebi support econom recoveri exit strategi thus act respons central bank draw exit strategi entail two question won touch upon instrument chairman bernank presid trichet examin particular question recent instead address issu analyt point view concret implement depend mani imponder least prospect econom recoveri stabilis financi market prospect fraught uncertainti intend discuss issu view central bank consid take decis exit show complex difficult decis go analysi pretend exhaust view follow five issu demand full attent one issu revers decis taken easili go back seem pretti obvious deeper implic let explain decis exit taken late monetari expans continu long fresh seed instabl financi sector sown hand decis taken earli econom recoveri might undermin mistak time prematur tardi would call type type ii error made past solut right obvious might think error worri remedi exit polici implement decis exit taken earli instanc central bank might slow thing howev decis taken late exit speed sound nice bit easi decis exit bound impact agent interest rate expect throughout whole yield curv lead substanti portfolio realloc desir inevit purpos exit strategi inde chang behaviour privat sector adjust expect larg lead disrupt affect financi stabil turn jeopardis sustain whole exit strategi particular late exit need acceler could produc unexpect shock instanc form loss fix incom market could hamper attempt financi institut progress regain access fund market effect delay might lead prolong nonstandard measur suppos phase rememb episod mere basispoint increas fed fund rate gave rise major loss bond market reflect fact probabl bit late loss constrain futur move relat gradualist second issu relat uncertainti surround analyt framework central bank dispos order decid optim interest rate path ideal stanc monetari polici calibr way avoid implicit eas monetari condit economi recov impli interest rate rais economi start grow potenti rate output gap start close problem framework difficult estim potenti growth size output gap especi shock like one experienc last two year look past major polici mistak made result overestim potenti growth size output gap particular recoveri led monetari polici over activist delay tighten phase thus fuell financi instabl twopillar strategi ecb help reduc type risk monetari credit aggreg use indic strengthen economi inflationari pressur still subdu current phase might take consider fact ongo process deleverag financi sector like take place time result correct previous credit bubbl might affect signal content money credit aggreg sure tighten phase cannot wait inflat materialis preced even case time around given low level interest rate reduc distanc steadi state level need attain latter difficult determin given uncertainti longerterm develop economi usual present comun challeng answer question common put central banker circumst rais interest rate inflat pace tighten obvious depend under condit particular speed recoveri given uncertainti would inappropri commit specif path ex ant anoth issu take account exit strategi fiscal polici dwell issu undoubt challeng one per se link exit monetari polici consid particular delay fiscal exit ceteri paribus monetari polici exit might brought forward inde given level debt accumul advanc economi delay fiscal exit like effect inflat expect may even disanchor risk monetari polici cannot take would undermin overal strategi subject inflat expect allow digress briefli inflat expect import indic central bank reflect credibl achiev price stabil howev recent experi suggest central bank complac even expect appear anchor privat sector might alway good predictor futur develop previous cycl inflat expect seem well anchor partial conceal buildup asset market instabl longerrun threat price stabil wellanchor inflat expect necessari condit appropri monetari polici suffici one let touch final issu relat financi stabil exit strategi interest rate polici defin basi primari object price stabil respect financi stabil secondari object given prioriti price stabil latter would obvious compromis exit nonstandard measur like link state financi market respect part disconnect interest rate polici given design nonstandard instrument implement ecb exit instrument take place interest rate decis without major effect howev time exit number financi institut still addict central bank liquid transmiss channel monetari polici might impair central bank task continu provid liquid financi institut abl stand feet turmoil respons supervisori author ultim treasuri address problem addict bank soon possibl recapitalis restructur appropri ensur bank jurisdict stand feet even without central bank facil let conclud tri identifi issu consid implement exit strategi side atlant observ pure analyt aim provid insight specif monetari polici decis next month purpos explain part analyt framework central bank oper side atlant like entri exit also call close interact monetari author might necessarili mean coordin action similar measur given differ situat howev challeng ahead quit similar ultim want avoid late earli solut right time commit friday septemb three six month rate us libor stood correspond rate euro area euribor see speech ecb presid jeanclaud trichet ecb exit strategi frankfurt septemb testimoni feder reserv chairman ben bernank committe financi servic us hous repres washington d c juli reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en