Jürgen Stark: The external dimension of monetary analysis,12-12-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,2239,"<p>The role of monetary analysis in the monetary policy process remains a topic of utmost importance to all central banks, whatever the strategy they pursue. It is pertinent to adopt a new perspective on monetary analysis, focusing on the impact of the global environment on monetary developments and how they should be assessed. Given the recent financial turmoil that has affected global markets, in part via international capital flows and global financial linkages, it is important to link monetary analysis to international developments. Let me come straight to the key substantive issues. In essence, I see three main topics for discussion: First : How can we assess global liquidity and what are its implications for consumer, commodity and asset prices? Second: What evidence is there of possible links between global monetary liquidity, international portfolio flows and domestic monetary growth? Third: In the context of the influences exerted by globalisation and, specifically, cross-border capital flows, what are the implications for monetary policy? In my remarks, I will address each of these issues in turn. First of all, when talking about liquidity, it is important to clarify that, in the field of central banking and monetary policy, there are at least four distinct definitions of liquidity – each with its own implications for policy-making. The first relates to “ central bank liquidity”, which is provided to the money market in order to steer short-term interest rates. The second refers to the general “ monetary policy stance”, as summarised by the level of policy interest rates. The third relates to “ financial market” liquidity, which is defined as the ease with which large volumes of financial securities can be traded, without affecting the market price. The fourth refers to “ monetary liquidity”, which is defined in quantitative terms on the basis of monetary and financial aggregates. While all are important – indeed key – to monetary policy-making in the current environment of strong money and credit growth at the global level, I deem it necessary to say a few words on this last type of liquidity. I think you would agree that it is difficult to precisely measure global monetary liquidity. There seems to be no universally accepted definition of it among economists. Several measures have been suggested and they all differ in many respects. They can be based on different monetary and credit aggregates; they may vary according to geographical coverage; and finally, they can be constructed using different types of aggregation.Even more challenging is diagnosing at what point global monetary liquidity becomes excessive. For excessive I mean liquidity that poses a medium or long-term threat to price stability or starts to boost asset prices to levels not justified by economic fundamentals. Certainly, a normative concept is needed to define excess liquidity. I hope that these two days will help us to make progress in reaching a common understanding on how to assess global liquidity insofar as the concept is established.Looking at the current situation, at least it can be asserted that global liquidity has been increasing at a sustained and vigorous pace over the past few years. We are also experiencing high asset prices all across the commodity markets and in some areas both, the housing markets and the stock markets. Commodity prices – notably oil and food prices – are also now rising strongly at the global level. In my view, we should be concerned about – and, as central bankers, alert to – the possibility that there may be a spillover into consumer prices.In particular, the wide availability of financial capital at low interest rates across the largest international financial markets has partly contributed to the significant rise in the prices of various assets in the recent years.Concerns about the impact of ample liquidity on asset prices – notably the underpricing of risks that has been signalled by the ECB– have been repeatedly voiced. In the context of rapid liquidity expansion, asset prices may overshoot, leading to potentially costly boom bust cycles, the misallocation of resources and pressures on price developments.In this respect, ECB research has also shown that monetary liquidity shocks have played a role in driving asset prices during the boom phase of asset price cycles. However, the issue of empirical causality between asset prices and portfolio allocation, on the one hand, and money and credit developments, on the other, remains a subject of ongoing research.A full understanding of the dynamics and forces behind global monetary liquidity is important for providing insights into the various transmission channels through which liquidity can affect the global business cycle, asset prices and global inflation. In the current context, if global economic growth and global liquidity are likely explanations for the recent increase in commodity prices, the resulting inflationary pressures should not necessarily be dismissed as “non-core”. The long-run impact of global commodity price pressures on inflation will depend on whether they reflect a temporary shock or a more persistent nominal trend, driven partly by ample global liquidity. Overall, when looking at the major OECD economies, consumer price inflation has been successfully contained for quite some time now. However, for the euro area at least, the information available at the current juncture – not least the monetary data at both the area-wide and global levels – points to upside risks to price stability.Let me now address the second issue I raised earlier. Before dealing with the evidence of possible links between global liquidity, international portfolio flows and euro area monetary growth, it is worthwhile recalling the theoretical work by James Tobin and Harry Markowitz on macroeconomics and asset pricing.The bulk of Tobin’s work in the 1950s and 1960s was on the monetary side of macroeconomics. One of his main objectives was to establish a firm foundation for the sensitivity of money demand, or money velocity, to interest rates. He argued that people may prefer liquidity, and prefer it more the lower the interest rate on non-cash assets, because individuals are risk adverse. Over the same period, Harry Markowitz worked on portfolio choice problems, balancing risks against expected returns. Markowitz showed that under certain given conditions, an investor’s portfolio choice can be reduced to balancing two dimensions, i.e. the expected return on the portfolio and its variance. When the Nobel Prize was announced in 1981, Tobin was asked about his work at the press conference. He tried to explain for a lay audience the idea of why it is that people hold different proportions of different assets in their portfolios. He said, “Well, you know, diversification – don’t put all your eggs in one basket”. This explanation led to headlines around the world: “Yale Economist Receives Nobel Prize for ‘Don’t Put All Your Eggs in One Basket’”. A similar argument was made when the Nobel Prize was awarded to Markowitz in 1990. Indeed the key results of Tobin’s and Markowitz’s work are labelled the “benefits of portfolio diversification”. Managers and academic economists have long been aware of the necessity of taking risk, as well as returns, into account when making portfolio decisions. The first pioneering contributions on money and asset pricing were therefore made in the 1950s, with the analysis focusing on the case of a closed economy. In this setting, for given risks, a rise in the expected excess returns implies a lower demand for money.In the course of the last 20 years, the globalisation of financial markets owing to the reduction of transaction costs and the enhancement of information flows has increased the share of global wealth invested outside investors’ home jurisdictions. The models of Tobin and Markowitz have become, therefore, much more complicated when extending the analysis to the global environment.Portfolio theory suggested that assets should be considered imperfect substitutes for each other, with the differences in their expected yields reflecting their marginal risks regardless of the economy being open or closed. However, the representative agent model is no longer applicable in the case of an open economy, as the presence of international capital flows requires either asymmetric information or heterogeneous belief among various agents. This makes the theoretical and empirical efforts to search for policy solutions a very complicated business. In an open economy setting, for given risks, a rise in expected excess returns does not necessarily imply a lower demand for money. Domestic assets may be purchased by foreign investors generating net portfolio inflows, which would raise domestic money growth.It is also true, however, that money and credit growth could trigger international portfolio flows.Specifically, two mechanisms can be identified through which liquidity affects international portfolio flows. First, strong money and credit growth in one country may induce capital outflows to foreign asset markets, thereby exerting upward pressure on prices for financial and real assets abroad. Second: At the same time, ample liquidity conditions in the domestic economy may fuel strong economic growth and be accompanied by higher asset prices, thereby inducing foreign capital inflows.The current magnitude of the stock of global liquidity and global savings is such that the asset prices and money growth of large economic areas, including the euro area, can be affected by them. In the same vein, large net capital inflows, as well as their sudden reversals, may also have important real consequences for large economies as they can systematically influence domestic monetary developments with potential implications for monetary policy.Evidence from the euro area shows that international portfolio flows have played an increasingly important role as a driving force for monetary dynamics. As you are aware, the ECB’s monetary policy strategy attributes a prominent role to the analysis of monetary aggregates and their counterparts in the assessment of risks to price stability over the medium to longer term. The growing size of international capital flows associated with globalisation of financial markets has made the analysis of monetary aggregates, for the purpose of extracting information for assessing price stability, increasingly more complex. This brings me to discuss the third point: the implications of globalisation and of international capital flows for monetary policy.If globalisation and, specifically, cross-border capital flows can affect the dynamics of monetary aggregates, how can we conduct monetary policy?An improved shared understanding of the influence of global liquidity and cross-border capital flows on the monetary policy transmission mechanism is necessary to enhance the analysis underlying our decisions. Our role and responsibilities as central bankers remain intact in the globalised economy, but the performance of our task may be becoming more challenging. Certainly, there is a need for timely and open exchange of information among central banks and for further collaborative research efforts.Still, let me stress that the globalisation of financial markets does not affect the central role and overriding responsibility of central banks, which is to preserve price stability within their respective jurisdictions. Central banks throughout the world have been assigned responsibility for keeping domestic inflation at low and stable rates. Cross-border capital flows may affect the velocity of money, but the basic principle for anchoring monetary policy – that is the Friedman’s view that “…in the long run, inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon” – remains valid. This has also been confirmed by studies that have found a strong relationship between monetary growth and inflation at low frequencies. In other words, the relationship between money and prices is stronger between the trend-like developments than between the business cycle fluctuations. One interpretation of the international portfolio capital flows that influence monetary developments is that they introduce greater “noise” in shorter-term monetary dynamics, thereby increasing the importance of seeking the underlying rate of monetary expansion by looking at the lower-frequency, trend-like component of monetary growth.Notwithstanding the complications created by an increasingly complex international financial system, money has been, is and will remain an important indicator of inflation. The monetary policy strategy devised by the ECB, with its medium-to-longer-term orientation and the prominence it assigns to economic and monetary analysis, is well placed to address some of the implications of globalisation for inflation dynamics and price stability. The broad analytical framework on which the ECB’s two-pillar strategy rests is well suited to detecting risks to price stability and to the economy as a whole.There is a need to intensify the analytical efforts to deepen our understanding of several aspects of financial innovations, changes in the international financial system and their implications for the assessment of medium to longer-term risks to price stability. Indeed, as our current agenda of enhancing the monetary analyses demonstrates, the ECB is in the vanguard of developing such tools.Adalid, R. and C. Detken (2007), “Liquidity Shocks and Asset Price Boom/Bust Cycles”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 732.Baks, K. and C. Kramer (1999), “Global liquidity and asset prices: measurement, implications and spillovers”, IMF Working Paper Series, No 168.Browne, F. and D. Cronin (2007), “Commodity prices, money and inflation”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 738.Ciccarelli, M. and B. Mojon (2005), “Global inflation”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 537.Detken, C. and F. Smets (2004), “Asset price booms and monetary policy”, ECB Working Paper No 364, published in Siebert, H. (ed.), “ Macroeconomic Policies in the World Economy”, Springer, Berlin, 2004. Markowitz, H. (1952), “Portfolio Selection,” Journal of Finance, 7: 77-91.Markowitz, H. (1959), Portfolio Selection: Efficient Diversification of Investments, Cowles Foundation Monograph 16, New York, Wiley.Sousa, J. and A. Zaghini (2004), “Monetary policy shocks in the euro area and global liquidity spillovers”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 309Tobin, J. (1969), “A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 1: pp. 15-29.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",role monetari analysi monetari polici process remain topic utmost import central bank whatev strategi pursu pertin adopt new perspect monetari analysi focus impact global environ monetari develop assess given recent financi turmoil affect global market part via intern capit flow global financi linkag import link monetari analysi intern develop let come straight key substant issu essenc see three main topic discuss first assess global liquid implic consum commod asset price second evid possibl link global monetari liquid intern portfolio flow domest monetari growth third context influenc exert globalis specif crossbord capit flow implic monetari polici remark address issu turn first talk liquid import clarifi field central bank monetari polici least four distinct definit liquid implic policymak first relat central bank liquid provid money market order steer shortterm interest rate second refer general monetari polici stanc summaris level polici interest rate third relat financi market liquid defin eas larg volum financi secur trade without affect market price fourth refer monetari liquid defin quantit term basi monetari financi aggreg import inde key monetari policymak current environ strong money credit growth global level deem necessari say word last type liquid think would agre difficult precis measur global monetari liquid seem univers accept definit among economist sever measur suggest differ mani respect base differ monetari credit aggreg may vari accord geograph coverag final construct use differ type aggreg even challeng diagnos point global monetari liquid becom excess excess mean liquid pose medium longterm threat price stabil start boost asset price level justifi econom fundament certain normat concept need defin excess liquid hope two day help us make progress reach common understand assess global liquid insofar concept establish look current situat least assert global liquid increas sustain vigor pace past year also experienc high asset price across commod market area hous market stock market commod price notabl oil food price also rise strong global level view concern central banker alert possibl may spillov consum price particular wide avail financi capit low interest rate across largest intern financi market part contribut signific rise price various asset recent year concern impact ampl liquid asset price notabl underpr risk signal ecb repeat voic context rapid liquid expans asset price may overshoot lead potenti cost boom bust cycl misalloc resourc pressur price develop respect ecb research also shown monetari liquid shock play role drive asset price boom phase asset price cycl howev issu empir causal asset price portfolio alloc one hand money credit develop remain subject ongo research full understand dynam forc behind global monetari liquid import provid insight various transmiss channel liquid affect global busi cycl asset price global inflat current context global econom growth global liquid like explan recent increas commod price result inflationari pressur necessarili dismiss noncor longrun impact global commod price pressur inflat depend whether reflect temporari shock persist nomin trend driven part ampl global liquid overal look major oecd economi consum price inflat success contain quit time howev euro area least inform avail current junctur least monetari data areawid global level point upsid risk price stabil let address second issu rais earlier deal evid possibl link global liquid intern portfolio flow euro area monetari growth worthwhil recal theoret work jame tobin harri markowitz macroeconom asset price bulk tobin work monetari side macroeconom one main object establish firm foundat sensit money demand money veloc interest rate argu peopl may prefer liquid prefer lower interest rate noncash asset individu risk advers period harri markowitz work portfolio choic problem balanc risk expect return markowitz show certain given condit investor portfolio choic reduc balanc two dimens e expect return portfolio varianc nobel prize announc tobin ask work press confer tri explain lay audienc idea peopl hold differ proport differ asset portfolio said well know diversif put egg one basket explan led headlin around world yale economist receiv nobel prize put egg one basket similar argument made nobel prize award markowitz inde key result tobin markowitz work label benefit portfolio diversif manag academ economist long awar necess take risk well return account make portfolio decis first pioneer contribut money asset price therefor made analysi focus case close economi set given risk rise expect excess return impli lower demand money cours last year globalis financi market owe reduct transact cost enhanc inform flow increas share global wealth invest outsid investor home jurisdict model tobin markowitz becom therefor much complic extend analysi global environ portfolio theori suggest asset consid imperfect substitut differ expect yield reflect margin risk regardless economi open close howev repres agent model longer applic case open economi presenc intern capit flow requir either asymmetr inform heterogen belief among various agent make theoret empir effort search polici solut complic busi open economi set given risk rise expect excess return necessarili impli lower demand money domest asset may purchas foreign investor generat net portfolio inflow would rais domest money growth also true howev money credit growth could trigger intern portfolio flow specif two mechan identifi liquid affect intern portfolio flow first strong money credit growth one countri may induc capit outflow foreign asset market therebi exert upward pressur price financi real asset abroad second time ampl liquid condit domest economi may fuel strong econom growth accompani higher asset price therebi induc foreign capit inflow current magnitud stock global liquid global save asset price money growth larg econom area includ euro area affect vein larg net capit inflow well sudden revers may also import real consequ larg economi systemat influenc domest monetari develop potenti implic monetari polici evid euro area show intern portfolio flow play increas import role drive forc monetari dynam awar ecb monetari polici strategi attribut promin role analysi monetari aggreg counterpart assess risk price stabil medium longer term grow size intern capit flow associ globalis financi market made analysi monetari aggreg purpos extract inform assess price stabil increas complex bring discuss third point implic globalis intern capit flow monetari polici globalis specif crossbord capit flow affect dynam monetari aggreg conduct monetari polici improv share understand influenc global liquid crossbord capit flow monetari polici transmiss mechan necessari enhanc analysi under decis role respons central banker remain intact globalis economi perform task may becom challeng certain need time open exchang inform among central bank collabor research effort still let stress globalis financi market affect central role overrid respons central bank preserv price stabil within respect jurisdict central bank throughout world assign respons keep domest inflat low stabl rate crossbord capit flow may affect veloc money basic principl anchor monetari polici friedman view long run inflat alway everywher monetari phenomenon remain valid also confirm studi found strong relationship monetari growth inflat low frequenc word relationship money price stronger trendlik develop busi cycl fluctuat one interpret intern portfolio capit flow influenc monetari develop introduc greater nois shorterterm monetari dynam therebi increas import seek under rate monetari expans look lowerfrequ trendlik compon monetari growth notwithstand complic creat increas complex intern financi system money remain import indic inflat monetari polici strategi devis ecb mediumtolongerterm orient promin assign econom monetari analysi well place address implic globalis inflat dynam price stabil broad analyt framework ecb twopillar strategi rest well suit detect risk price stabil economi whole need intensifi analyt effort deepen understand sever aspect financi innov chang intern financi system implic assess medium longerterm risk price stabil inde current agenda enhanc monetari analys demonstr ecb vanguard develop tool adalid r c detken liquid shock asset price boombust cycl ecb work paper seri bak k c kramer global liquid asset price measur implic spillov imf work paper seri brown f d cronin commod price money inflat ecb work paper seri ciccarelli m b mojon global inflat ecb work paper seri detken c f smet asset price boom monetari polici ecb work paper publish siebert h ed macroeconom polici world economi springer berlin markowitz h portfolio select journal financ markowitz h portfolio select effici diversif invest cowl foundat monograph new york wiley sousa j zaghini monetari polici shock euro area global liquid spillov ecb work paper seri tobin j general equilibrium approach monetari theori journal money credit bank pp reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en