Jean-Claude Trichet: Celebration of the 130th anniversary of Banca Naţională a României,05-09-2010,European Central Bank,ECB,768,"<p>Dear President,Dear Prime Minister,Your Excellencies,Dear Governor Isărescu,Ladies and Gentlemen,It is a great honour and a pleasure for me to be here this evening to address you on the occasion of the 130th anniversary of Banca Naţională a României. I should like to start by thanking my colleague, Governor Isărescu, for inviting me to this event. This is not my first visit to Banca Naţională a României, and I would like to tell you that it is always a real pleasure to be here thanks to the warm welcome extended by the Romanian National Bank. Banca Naţională a României has good reason to proudly celebrate this historic date: the achievements of the last 130 years have been manifold. The National Bank of Romania, like most other central banks with a long history, did not come into being as the institution we know today. It has evolved over time. Since its establishment in April 1880 it has progressively acquired new functions and duties. Over time it has also established close relationships with the banking and financial system, both at home and at the international level. There are good reasons why the Romanian National Bank has become one of the most respected public institutions in this country. Over the last 130 years, Banca Naţională a României, like the Romanian nation itself, has been confronted with several major challenges, including the historic events of 1989 and the ensuing economic transition. The cooperation between the ECB and Banca Naţională a României began well before the actual accession of Romania to the EU. In October 2004, for example, I visited the central bank to meet with Governor Isărescu and the Executive Board. The aim of this visit was to prepare the ground for the future cooperation between the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) and the National Bank of Romania in anticipation of the EU membership of Romania. Since then the integration of Banca Naţională a României into the European System of Central Banks has proceeded smoothly, and the work carried out by the central bank’s managers in the respective ESCB committees has been highly appreciated for its dedication and very high standard. Let me take this opportunity to state how important is Central Bank independence, which is called for by the European Union legislation.There can be no doubt that over the past years the Romanian economy has accomplished significant progress. Yet, as we all know, the economic situation was, and still is, extremely challenging. The Romanian economy, like many others, has been hard hit by the global financial crisis. Its adjustment is supported by a financial agreement of the European Union and the IMF. Indeed, a challenging fiscal, financial and structural adjustment process is called for. I am convinced that this will help to lay the foundations for a sustainable process of further convergence on the part of the Romanian economy. The ECB is closely involved in monitoring this adjustment programme, reflecting its profound interest in Romania and the development of its economy. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate Banca Naţională a României for the conduct of its monetary policy in such difficult circumstances and for its contribution to the financial stability of the country thanks to its sound supervisory policies. I would also like to encourage the Romanian government in implementing the bold decisions that were and are necessary in the domain of economic and financial policies. But this is no time for complacency in any respect. It remains essential both for Romania and for other economies to pursue the reform process very actively and to pave the way for sustainable macroeconomic developments, including sound fiscal policy, which are so essential in the medium term. There is no substitute for sound and stability-oriented economic policies. That is why I should like to encourage the Romanian authorities to remain ambitious in pursuing sound and stability-oriented economic policies that can bring sustainable economic growth in the medium and long term. This applies, in particular, to the conduct of fiscal policy and to the implementation of timely and consistent structural reforms that support the sustainability of the convergence process. All economic policy actors, without exception, need to be committed to the achievement of this goal. At the ECB we stand ready to maintain and reinforce our dialogue with Banca Naţională a României, a dialogue that has proven very fruitful in the past. I am confident that our excellent working relationship will continue to serve both our institutions well.Happy birthday, National Bank of Romania! La mulţi ani Băncii Naţionale a României!Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",dear presid dear prime minist excel dear governor isărescu ladi gentlemen great honour pleasur even address occas th anniversari banca naţională româniei like start thank colleagu governor isărescu invit event first visit banca naţională româniei would like tell alway real pleasur thank warm welcom extend romanian nation bank banca naţională româniei good reason proud celebr histor date achiev last year manifold nation bank romania like central bank long histori come institut know today evolv time sinc establish april progress acquir new function duti time also establish close relationship bank financi system home intern level good reason romanian nation bank becom one respect public institut countri last year banca naţională româniei like romanian nation confront sever major challeng includ histor event ensu econom transit cooper ecb banca naţională româniei began well actual access romania eu octob exampl visit central bank meet governor isărescu execut board aim visit prepar ground futur cooper european system central bank escb nation bank romania anticip eu membership romania sinc integr banca naţională româniei european system central bank proceed smooth work carri central bank manag respect escb committe high appreci dedic high standard let take opportun state import central bank independ call european union legisl doubt past year romanian economi accomplish signific progress yet know econom situat still extrem challeng romanian economi like mani other hard hit global financi crisi adjust support financi agreement european union imf inde challeng fiscal financi structur adjust process call convinc help lay foundat sustain process converg part romanian economi ecb close involv monitor adjust programm reflect profound interest romania develop economi let take opportun congratul banca naţională româniei conduct monetari polici difficult circumst contribut financi stabil countri thank sound supervisori polici would also like encourag romanian govern implement bold decis necessari domain econom financi polici time complac respect remain essenti romania economi pursu reform process activ pave way sustain macroeconom develop includ sound fiscal polici essenti medium term substitut sound stabilityori econom polici like encourag romanian author remain ambiti pursu sound stabilityori econom polici bring sustain econom growth medium long term appli particular conduct fiscal polici implement time consist structur reform support sustain converg process econom polici actor without except need commit achiev goal ecb stand readi maintain reinforc dialogu banca naţională româniei dialogu proven fruit past confid excel work relationship continu serv institut well happi birthday nation bank romania la mulţi ani băncii naţional româniei reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en