Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Monetary policy in challenging times,19-11-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,4140,"<p>I would first of all start by thanking you for the invitation to speak about the current challenges facing monetary policy. There are increasing signs that advanced economies have started a gradual recovery. Policy-makers across the globe have responded rapidly and forcefully – and have had an effect. National governments have adopted extraordinary measures to support the financial sector. They have also implemented fiscal programmes to directly stimulate economic activity. Central banks have lowered policy rates close to zero and introduced a number of unconventional tools to provide liquidity support. The fears of a very bad outcome – like the Great Depression that paralysed the world economy in the 1930s – have receded. But the economic outlook is still uncertain.Today, I’d like to discuss the current economic and financial situation and outlook. In particular I’ll be asking: are the financial markets recovering more quickly than the real economy, bearing in mind that the growth prospects are still overshadowed by risks? If so, it will prove testing not only for monetary policy but also for other policies. I will consider this challenge against the background of a phasing-out of the exceptional policy measures taken by central banks over the last year. The outlook for the economy – both in the euro area and at global level – has improved significantly during the last two quarters. A number of countries have returned to positive growth rates. Asian economies have recently performed strongly. In contrast with developments one year ago, most professional forecasters have started to revise their economic projections upwards.The Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections will be published in two weeks’ time. I will not anticipate the outcome. But as we stated earlier this month, the latest information continues to signal an improvement in economic activity. According to the flash estimate from Eurostat, the euro area economy grew by 0.4% in the third quarter this year, ending a period of five successive quarters with negative growth rates. Available survey evidence indicates that the situation has continued to improve in the fourth quarter. But the pace of the recovery is likely to be gradual and uneven. Many of the factors supporting growth are of a temporary nature. The impact of the strong fiscal stimulus will progressively fade, and the positive contribution from the inventory cycle will not last. The banking system is still under pressure, and many households and firms are likely to cut down their debt levels before increasing spending and investment again. Unemployment, which reached 9.7% in the euro area in September, is expected to continue rising for some time in many countries, weighing on consumer spending. Several risk factors may slow the recovery down. One is a further increase in commodity prices, which might take place if emerging markets pick up more quickly than expected. Oil prices have been trading just below 80 US dollars recently, about a doubling of the price level since the beginning of the year. We saw it earlier this decade: oil price increases were expected to be temporary, but instead they rose steadily, reducing the terms of trade of most advanced economies. Another risk factor is the ability of the banking system to support the economy by providing sufficient credit once the demand for investment starts growing again. This will depend on how well the system restructures its balance sheet and recapitalises over the next few months. Another risk is the potential instability in financial markets, in particular with respect to excess volatility in the foreign exchange markets, which is detrimental to export and investment decisions.Looking at financial markets, one gets the impression that they are expecting a somewhat stronger recovery. Stock markets in the euro area and the US have increased by about 50% since they bottomed in March, although they are still about 30% to 40% below their 2007 peak levels (see Chart 1). However, price-earnings ratios are back to their historical average, even though we have just been through the worst recession since World War II. In the US the price-earnings ratio for financial corporations is historically high.In the corporate bonds market, spreads have declined rapidly in recent months. They are now at levels below those prevailing just before Lehman Brothers’ failure (see chart 2). In the euro area the bond spread for financial corporations with a triple-B rating is currently around 640 basis points. The spread for non-financial corporations with a similar rating is around 120 basis points. Debt issuance by the corporate sector has increased substantially over recent months, suggesting a shift from bank to market-based financing. In the current environment of improving expectations, the recent compression of corporate bond spreads may indicate that conditions in these markets are returning to normal.Information from long-term government bond yields may embody a more cautious assessment of the growth outlook, as euro area government bond yields declined over the summer. The ten-year government bond yield in the euro area now stands at 3.6%, down from 4.3% in June. But the large-scale issuance of long-term government bonds was met by strong demand from the banking sector and institutional investors. Altogether, recent financial market developments seem to reflect an increase in risk appetite in an environment of low interest rates and improved liquidity in financial markets. Overall, the assessment underlying financial market conditions appears somewhat more optimistic than the consensus forecast for economic recovery. To some extent this is normal, as financial variables tend to anticipate future economic developments. Yet, the current low levels of interest rates and the progressive return of risk appetite may push investors to take speculative positions that would be consistent with a more optimistic scenario than the baseline. An interesting question is whether the uncertain prospects for the real economy might be diverging from those for the financial markets, which appear somewhat more optimistic. If this divergence persisted, monetary policy would face a challenge. The underlying stance would appear to be looser, in relative terms, when assessed against the conditions prevailing in financial markets then when compared to real economic developments. This hypothesis seems to be confirmed by the contrasting trends within the banking sector: credit flow to the real economy remains subdued while trading activity has recovered strongly. Monetary policy might thus be insufficiently effective in stimulating economic recovery but too effective with respect to risks of asset price bubbles in the financial sector. How does monetary policy address this potential divergence, in particular in the euro area?We need to start by looking closely at the data. Take the pass-through of policy rates to lending rates practised by banks to the end users. Evidence shows that lending rates have declined substantially since last autumn, both for households and firms. This has been the result of the cuts in policy rates and the decline in money market spreads, which are now lower than they were just before the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. At the three-month horizon, the spread has declined to about 30 basis points in the euro area. The floating rate on loans to households for house purchase has roughly halved since October last year, and was 2.8% in September (see Chart 3). Overall, the degree of pass-through has been broadly in line with past regularities. But surveys of both firms and banks indicate that financing costs related to non-interest terms and conditions – such as charges and fees or collateral requirements – have been tightened.Credit aggregates have slowed down significantly over recent months. In September lending to the private sector was 0.3% lower than a year earlier. This was the first negative number since the start of monetary union. In analysing these credit aggregates, we have to keep in mind the interaction between supply and demand. It is always difficult to disentangle two sides. There are several reasons for expecting loan demand to be weak now. As production has declined considerably over the past year, firms may have delayed or cancelled investment projects, and thus reduced their demand for new loans. Similarly, households may think twice about major purchases as job prospects have become more uncertain. Compared with past downturns, the recent developments in credit flows seem to be in line with historical regularities. In the past, the pick-up in loans to non-financial corporations has lagged the turning points in economic activity by about three quarters. This means that we should expect lending to non-financial corporations to remain relatively subdued for some time. The annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations was -0.1% in September. Lending to households, which tends to move more in line with the turning points in economic activity, was 0.3% lower in September than a year earlier. The monthly loan flows to households have however been positive and increasing since May this year.Overall, the significant slowdown in lending experienced so far can to a large extent be attributed to weak demand, as surveys both of banks and firms have shown. One example is the recent survey on small and medium sized enterprises’ (SMEs) access to finance, conducted in co-operation between the ECB and the European Commission. According to the survey, three out of five SMEs that had applied for a bank loan in the first half of 2009 received the requested amount in full. Around one in five received the requested amount in part. Only about one in ten had the loan application rejected. However, some supply-side constraints seem to have played a role. Banks have tightened credit standards substantially over the past year. The quarterly survey of banks indicates that the number of banks tightening credit standards has declined, but remains positive. Banks have reported that their liquidity position has helped to ease credit constraints very recently.While private-sector demand for credit has slowed down, public-sector demand has accelerated. The European Commission projects that the euro area government deficit will increase from 2.0% of GDP in 2008 to 6.4% in 2009 and 6.9% in 2010. The increasing deficit has been met by a strong supply of credit from the banking system. Euro area banks have been buying considerable amounts of government bonds over the past few quarters. This has taken place against a steepening of the yield curve. In the third quarter of 2009 the difference between the yield on longer-term euro area government bonds and the three-month inter-bank interest rate was on average 308 basis points. This is the largest gap since 1980. It suggests that the funding costs for banks have become favourable relative to the yield on longer-term investment such as government bonds. Overall, the recent purchases of government bonds by euro area banks have not been out of line with what we would expect, given the current circumstances. Historically, bank purchases of government debt securities have shown a strong correlation with the steepness of the yield curve. Banks regard the purchase of government bonds as an attractive strategy, for when making such purchases they park liquidity while demand for loans remains subdued and at the same time they make their portfolios less risky. Beyond the influence our policy has had on the yield curve, the available evidence does not indicate that our liquidity support has led to excessive purchases of government bonds by banks.To sum up, the divergence between slow credit flow and buoyant trading by the banking system seems to be in line with historical experience under comparable conditions. The current low level of interest rates is consistent with the analyses conducted under the economic and monetary pillars of the ECB’s strategy, which point to the absence of inflationary pressures. The question is: how long can low levels of interest rates be maintained without creating distortions in the efficient allocation of funds by the financial sector, and possibly endangering price stability? This is at the heart of the exit strategy. Before turning to it, let me make a few remarks about the divergent behaviour within the financial sector, especially in banks.As I just mentioned, it is no surprise to see a slowdown in credit flows at the same time as a pick-up in trading. To some extent this divergence is desirable because a sound financial system is the key to a sustainable recovery. Still, it might create undesirable volatility in financial markets. To put it in other words, if the abundant liquidity provided by the central banks does not find its way through to the real economy because of weak credit demand, and instead remains within financial channels, we could experience short-term dynamics in the capital markets which may hold back economic growth itself.Some have downplayed this risk, saying that we are not experiencing the same feedback loops operating through the credit cycle that led to the pre-crisis bubble. [2] According to this view, even if financial markets were to experience some bubbles, they would not be so dangerous as they are not linked to the real economy through the credit channel. They can burst with little risk and few repercussions. I would be a bit more cautious. Let me remind that the prevailing paradigm before the crisis was that the best way to deal with bubbles should have been to let them burst and thereafter engineer an expansionary monetary policy to counter the negative effects. It might be risky to now move to a new paradigm, potentially as mistaken as the previous one, that only asset price bubbles linked to credit flows are dangerous. Bubbles which feed asset prices, including commodity prices, if protracted, can feed expectations and weaken confidence when they burst, even if they are not associated with a credit boom. In addition, we should not forget that the effects of a bubble burst are the more damaging the more fragile is the state of the economy. We clearly need to study this more closely before we can be relaxed about it.As the economy stabilises and picks up again over time, and the demand for investment rebounds, the key question will be: can the banking system meet a higher demand for credit? In other words, when the drag on the demand for credit eases, will the supply follow, or will there still be constraints on the flow of credit to the real economy? The answer to this question is the key to the recovery. But it’s not a question that monetary policy can answer. The banking sector has been restructuring in response to the financial crisis. No doubt about it. This has included a retrenchment from excessive risk-taking as well as capital enhancement and cost-cutting. These measures have helped to absorb the shocks which have occurred since mid-2007, including the sizeable mark-to-market write-downs on impaired assets and, more recently, the losses triggered by the decline in loan credit quality. Loan loss provisions surged and were about a third higher than net interest income earned by euro area large and complex banking groups in the second quarter of 2009. This was the highest level seen in the past five years. The increase in revenues from the core banking business and the considerable cost-cutting have nevertheless boosted profitability this year. Income from trading has recovered strongly in this period, also improving banks’ performance. The restored profitability has recently enabled some European banks to start repaying the capital injections provided by governments, suggesting greater robustness in the system. However, the trend worsening of non-performing loans should not be considered over yet –it might turn out to be worse than projected. Banks shouldn’t assume that it’s time to go back to previous practices, using their profits primarily to remunerate staff and reward shareholders. They need first of all to give priority to further improving their capital position, as a buffer against worst-case scenarios. Supervisory authorities should keep an eye on banks for this reason.Banks need also to plan for more stable and sustainable long-term sources of financing. It’s interesting to note that non-financial corporations have successfully made large bond issues, while monetary financial institutions have been much more timid, compared with their pre-crisis levels (see Chart 4). Since mid-2008, the annual growth rate of debt securities issued by monetary financial institutions roughly halved to around 4% in September. By contrast, the growth rate of debt securities issued by non-financial corporations increased over the same period from around 3% to 15%. The support mechanisms provided by governments have not been fully utilised, in particular with respect to guarantees (see Chart 5). In any case, the situation remains imbalanced. Some banks are still very reliant on unlimited central bank financing. These cases have to be addressed rapidly by the responsible national authorities. Otherwise they will create a burden on the other banks, by overbidding for and hoarding liquidity. Let me turn to the exit strategy. This is an issue on which many have spoken recently. I won’t repeat the arguments which have already been expounded very clearly. The exit strategy has two dimensions. One concerns the non-standard measures which have been implemented to improve the functioning of the transmission mechanism. The other relates to the stance of monetary policy, which can be calibrated through the operations conducted by the central bank. Let me make a few observations. First, the decisions to unwind the non-standard measures and to adjust the level of key interest rates can to some extent be separated. In particular, any adjustment to the policy stance will depend on the assessment of the risks to price stability. It can be implemented independently from the stage which has been reached at a given moment in the withdrawal of the non-standard instruments. The withdrawal of a non-standard measure would not necessarily have an impact on the monetary policy stance. Secondly, a decision about the timing of the exit from the very low level of interest rate requires a close monitoring of all relevant developments. Any measure which could pose an upward risk to price stability will be withdrawn in a timely fashion. In this respect I would prefer not to listen to those who are recommending a bias in deciding the timing of the exit, i.e. that it’s preferable to err on the side of late rather than early withdrawal. It’s pretty obvious that a premature exit may undermine the incipient economic recovery. But a belated response can be equally damaging. This aspect is often underestimated, and rarely studied. Indeed, the later the exit – and the greater the catching-up to be done – the more disruptive the asset price adjustment and the bigger the impact on economic activity. Thirdly, in assessing whether a given measure should be withdrawn, a central bank should ask itself two questions: are the underlying risks which led it to adopt the measure in the first place still looming? And: could the removal of the measure make such risks reappear? Let me consider the following: interest rates have been brought down to levels close to zero in the face of the sharp recessionary pressures and the risk of deflation. As the economy stabilises and the risks of deflation fade away, partly as a result of the measures taken, the question arises as to whether the exit from the low rates would lead to a re-emergence of the risks of recession and deflation. And there’s another question: could the low level of interest rates, if prolonged, create at some point distortions in financial markets and in the real economy that might complicate the exit? Just to be concrete, nominal one-year government bond yields in the euro area are currently lower than inflation expectations for the next 12 months. This means negative real rates of return. We have to consider thoroughly the implications this may have for the allocation of resources and the functioning of markets. These issues have been raised over the past years, and were notably analysed by Raghuram Rajan in his celebrated 2005 Jackson Hole speech. [3] However, little work has been done on this issue since then. Given that the protracted period of low interest rates turned out to be responsible for fuelling the credit bubble which was at the origin of the crisis, research on this issue is urgently needed.An issue which also deserves attention is the assessment of the policy stance in light of changing underlying macroeconomic conditions. Both the public and market participants tend to assess the policy stance on the basis of the level of the policy rate. The stance is considered to be tightened when the policy rate is raised and loosened when the rate is lowered. In fact, monetary theory suggests that the stance can change even if the policy rate remains unchanged. For instance, with an unchanged policy rate an increase in the projected inflation would imply lower real rates, and thus a more expansionary policy. The same applies for an increase in projected growth. In other words, keeping the policy rate unchanged when the projected growth rate and inflation rate over the policy-relevant horizon are systematically revised upwards entails a loosening of the policy stance. Policy authorities have thus to judge whether such an easing is appropriate in light of the prevailing conditions, especially if projected inflation is still within the definition of price stability. One variable that central banks monitor regularly to assess whether a given policy rate may determine an excessively expansionary policy is inflation expectations. Well anchored inflation expectations may reassure policy makers that they can maintain an accommodative policy stance even as the economy recovers. However, experience has shown that measures of inflation expectations have to be taken with great caution. First, inflation expectations might be based on assumptions of a future interest rate path that does not necessarily coincide with the intentions of the central bank. Second, inflation expectations formulated by market participants tend to be influenced by central bank behaviour, to the extent that the former expect the latter to have superior information. In this case inflation expectations remain low as long as the policy rates remain unchanged but are suddenly revised up as the policy rates are increased. The experience of the 1994 interest rate increase by the Fed might be an example of such behaviour by market participants. Finally, in the current situation, more than ever, asset prices tend to be affected by the exceptional measures implemented by central banks and the large flow of capital from Emerging markets. This might distort the extraction of inflation expectations from asset prices. To sum up, central banks should avoid being too complacent when assessing inflation expectations on the basis of measures extracted from long term assets. A broad set of indicators needs to be considered. Overall, it is appropriate for central banks – and authorities in general – to discuss exit strategies in good time, in order to prepare themselves and the markets adequately. As economic conditions recover and financial markets stabilise, the need for extraordinary monetary policy measures diminishes. But discussing and explaining exit strategies is not the same as implementing them – it serves as a reminder that they will take place and that the exceptional measures will not last for ever. In particular, banks have to start thinking about standing on their own feet as soon as they can, and about resorting to the traditional sources of financing.Allow me to summarise my main points today. After going through the most synchronised and severe downturn since World War II since last autumn, the global economy is now gradually recovering. But uncertainty is still high.The situation has improved remarkably quickly in a number of financial markets. But we also have to take into account that the decline was just as fast, and even more dramatic in the months just after the Lehman bankruptcy. Nevertheless, we cannot rule out that the recent buoyant developments in asset prices have been driven by the ample liquidity situation in financial markets.Central banks have done their job. Ample liquidity has been made available to help the euro area economy recover. Looking ahead, and taking into account the improved conditions in financial markets, not all the liquidity measures will be needed to the same extent as in the past. As we have said on a number of occasions, we will make sure that the extraordinary liquidity measures are phased out in a timely and gradual fashion and that this liquidity is absorbed so as to avoid any threat to price stability over the medium to longer term.What is more important is that the financial sector takes advantage of the current situation to complete its restructuring and equip itself to stand on its own feet so as to support the economy on its way to the recovery. This is the priority at the current juncture.Thank you for your attention.[1] I would like to thank E. W. Nordbo, G. Camba-Méndez, I. Cabral and L. Cappiello for their input. I remain responsible for the opinions.[2] See for instance F. Mishkin, “Not all bubbles present a risk to the recovery”, Financial Times, 9 November 2009.[3] Rajan, R. (2005): Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier? Speech delivered at a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",would first start thank invit speak current challeng face monetari polici increas sign advanc economi start gradual recoveri policymak across globe respond rapid forc effect nation govern adopt extraordinari measur support financi sector also implement fiscal programm direct stimul econom activ central bank lower polici rate close zero introduc number unconvent tool provid liquid support fear bad outcom like great depress paralys world economi reced econom outlook still uncertain today d like discuss current econom financi situat outlook particular ll ask financi market recov quick real economi bear mind growth prospect still overshadow risk prove test monetari polici also polici consid challeng background phasingout except polici measur taken central bank last year outlook economi euro area global level improv signific last two quarter number countri return posit growth rate asian economi recent perform strong contrast develop one year ago profession forecast start revis econom project upward eurosystem staff macroeconom project publish two week time anticip outcom state earlier month latest inform continu signal improv econom activ accord flash estim eurostat euro area economi grew third quarter year end period five success quarter negat growth rate avail survey evid indic situat continu improv fourth quarter pace recoveri like gradual uneven mani factor support growth temporari natur impact strong fiscal stimulus progress fade posit contribut inventori cycl last bank system still pressur mani household firm like cut debt level increas spend invest unemploy reach euro area septemb expect continu rise time mani countri weigh consum spend sever risk factor may slow recoveri one increas commod price might take place emerg market pick quick expect oil price trade us dollar recent doubl price level sinc begin year saw earlier decad oil price increas expect temporari instead rose steadili reduc term trade advanc economi anoth risk factor abil bank system support economi provid suffici credit demand invest start grow depend well system restructur balanc sheet recapitalis next month anoth risk potenti instabl financi market particular respect excess volatil foreign exchang market detriment export invest decis look financi market one get impress expect somewhat stronger recoveri stock market euro area us increas sinc bottom march although still peak level see chart howev priceearn ratio back histor averag even though worst recess sinc world war ii us priceearn ratio financi corpor histor high corpor bond market spread declin rapid recent month level prevail lehman brother failur see chart euro area bond spread financi corpor tripleb rate current around basi point spread nonfinanci corpor similar rate around basi point debt issuanc corpor sector increas substanti recent month suggest shift bank marketbas financ current environ improv expect recent compress corpor bond spread may indic condit market return normal inform longterm govern bond yield may embodi cautious assess growth outlook euro area govern bond yield declin summer tenyear govern bond yield euro area stand june largescal issuanc longterm govern bond met strong demand bank sector institut investor altogeth recent financi market develop seem reflect increas risk appetit environ low interest rate improv liquid financi market overal assess under financi market condit appear somewhat optimist consensus forecast econom recoveri extent normal financi variabl tend anticip futur econom develop yet current low level interest rate progress return risk appetit may push investor take specul posit would consist optimist scenario baselin interest question whether uncertain prospect real economi might diverg financi market appear somewhat optimist diverg persist monetari polici would face challeng under stanc would appear looser relat term assess condit prevail financi market compar real econom develop hypothesi seem confirm contrast trend within bank sector credit flow real economi remain subdu trade activ recov strong monetari polici might thus insuffici effect stimul econom recoveri effect respect risk asset price bubbl financi sector monetari polici address potenti diverg particular euro area need start look close data take passthrough polici rate lend rate practis bank end user evid show lend rate declin substanti sinc last autumn household firm result cut polici rate declin money market spread lower bankruptci lehman brother threemonth horizon spread declin basi point euro area float rate loan household hous purchas rough halv sinc octob last year septemb see chart overal degre passthrough broad line past regular survey firm bank indic financ cost relat noninterest term condit charg fee collater requir tighten credit aggreg slow signific recent month septemb lend privat sector lower year earlier first negat number sinc start monetari union analys credit aggreg keep mind interact suppli demand alway difficult disentangl two side sever reason expect loan demand weak product declin consider past year firm may delay cancel invest project thus reduc demand new loan similar household may think twice major purchas job prospect becom uncertain compar past downturn recent develop credit flow seem line histor regular past pickup loan nonfinanci corpor lag turn point econom activ three quarter mean expect lend nonfinanci corpor remain relat subdu time annual growth rate loan nonfinanci corpor septemb lend household tend move line turn point econom activ lower septemb year earlier month loan flow household howev posit increas sinc may year overal signific slowdown lend experienc far larg extent attribut weak demand survey bank firm shown one exampl recent survey small medium size enterpris smes access financ conduct cooper ecb european commiss accord survey three five smes appli bank loan first half receiv request amount full around one five receiv request amount part one ten loan applic reject howev supplysid constraint seem play role bank tighten credit standard substanti past year quarter survey bank indic number bank tighten credit standard declin remain posit bank report liquid posit help eas credit constraint recent privatesector demand credit slow publicsector demand acceler european commiss project euro area govern deficit increas gdp increas deficit met strong suppli credit bank system euro area bank buy consider amount govern bond past quarter taken place steepen yield curv third quarter differ yield longerterm euro area govern bond threemonth interbank interest rate averag basi point largest gap sinc suggest fund cost bank becom favour relat yield longerterm invest govern bond overal recent purchas govern bond euro area bank line would expect given current circumst histor bank purchas govern debt secur shown strong correl steep yield curv bank regard purchas govern bond attract strategi make purchas park liquid demand loan remain subdu time make portfolio less riski beyond influenc polici yield curv avail evid indic liquid support led excess purchas govern bond bank sum diverg slow credit flow buoyant trade bank system seem line histor experi compar condit current low level interest rate consist analys conduct econom monetari pillar ecb strategi point absenc inflationari pressur question long low level interest rate maintain without creat distort effici alloc fund financi sector possibl endang price stabil heart exit strategi turn let make remark diverg behaviour within financi sector especi bank mention surpris see slowdown credit flow time pickup trade extent diverg desir sound financi system key sustain recoveri still might creat undesir volatil financi market put word abund liquid provid central bank find way real economi weak credit demand instead remain within financi channel could experi shortterm dynam capit market may hold back econom growth downplay risk say experienc feedback loop oper credit cycl led precrisi bubbl accord view even financi market experi bubbl would danger link real economi credit channel burst littl risk repercuss would bit cautious let remind prevail paradigm crisi best way deal bubbl let burst thereaft engin expansionari monetari polici counter negat effect might riski move new paradigm potenti mistaken previous one asset price bubbl link credit flow danger bubbl feed asset price includ commod price protract feed expect weaken confid burst even associ credit boom addit forget effect bubbl burst damag fragil state economi clear need studi close relax economi stabilis pick time demand invest rebound key question bank system meet higher demand credit word drag demand credit eas suppli follow still constraint flow credit real economi answer question key recoveri question monetari polici answer bank sector restructur respons financi crisi doubt includ retrench excess risktak well capit enhanc costcut measur help absorb shock occur sinc mid includ sizeabl marktomarket writedown impair asset recent loss trigger declin loan credit qualiti loan loss provis surg third higher net interest incom earn euro area larg complex bank group second quarter highest level seen past five year increas revenu core bank busi consider costcut nevertheless boost profit year incom trade recov strong period also improv bank perform restor profit recent enabl european bank start repay capit inject provid govern suggest greater robust system howev trend worsen nonperform loan consid yet might turn wors project bank shouldn assum time go back previous practic use profit primarili remuner staff reward sharehold need first give prioriti improv capit posit buffer worstcas scenario supervisori author keep eye bank reason bank need also plan stabl sustain longterm sourc financ interest note nonfinanci corpor success made larg bond issu monetari financi institut much timid compar precrisi level see chart sinc mid annual growth rate debt secur issu monetari financi institut rough halv around septemb contrast growth rate debt secur issu nonfinanci corpor increas period around support mechan provid govern fulli utilis particular respect guarante see chart case situat remain imbalanc bank still reliant unlimit central bank financ case address rapid respons nation author otherwis creat burden bank overbid hoard liquid let turn exit strategi issu mani spoken recent won repeat argument alreadi expound clear exit strategi two dimens one concern nonstandard measur implement improv function transmiss mechan relat stanc monetari polici calibr oper conduct central bank let make observ first decis unwind nonstandard measur adjust level key interest rate extent separ particular adjust polici stanc depend assess risk price stabil implement independ stage reach given moment withdraw nonstandard instrument withdraw nonstandard measur would necessarili impact monetari polici stanc second decis time exit low level interest rate requir close monitor relev develop measur could pose upward risk price stabil withdrawn time fashion respect would prefer listen recommend bias decid time exit e prefer err side late rather earli withdraw pretti obvious prematur exit may undermin incipi econom recoveri belat respons equal damag aspect often underestim rare studi inde later exit greater catchingup done disrupt asset price adjust bigger impact econom activ third assess whether given measur withdrawn central bank ask two question under risk led adopt measur first place still loom could remov measur make risk reappear let consid follow interest rate brought level close zero face sharp recessionari pressur risk deflat economi stabilis risk deflat fade away part result measur taken question aris whether exit low rate would lead reemerg risk recess deflat anoth question could low level interest rate prolong creat point distort financi market real economi might complic exit concret nomin oneyear govern bond yield euro area current lower inflat expect next month mean negat real rate return consid thorough implic may alloc resourc function market issu rais past year notabl analys raghuram rajan celebr jackson hole speech howev littl work done issu sinc given protract period low interest rate turn respons fuell credit bubbl origin crisi research issu urgent need issu also deserv attent assess polici stanc light chang under macroeconom condit public market particip tend assess polici stanc basi level polici rate stanc consid tighten polici rate rais loosen rate lower fact monetari theori suggest stanc chang even polici rate remain unchang instanc unchang polici rate increas project inflat would impli lower real rate thus expansionari polici appli increas project growth word keep polici rate unchang project growth rate inflat rate policyrelev horizon systemat revis upward entail loosen polici stanc polici author thus judg whether eas appropri light prevail condit especi project inflat still within definit price stabil one variabl central bank monitor regular assess whether given polici rate may determin excess expansionari polici inflat expect well anchor inflat expect may reassur polici maker maintain accommod polici stanc even economi recov howev experi shown measur inflat expect taken great caution first inflat expect might base assumpt futur interest rate path necessarili coincid intent central bank second inflat expect formul market particip tend influenc central bank behaviour extent former expect latter superior inform case inflat expect remain low long polici rate remain unchang sudden revis polici rate increas experi interest rate increas fed might exampl behaviour market particip final current situat ever asset price tend affect except measur implement central bank larg flow capit emerg market might distort extract inflat expect asset price sum central bank avoid complac assess inflat expect basi measur extract long term asset broad set indic need consid overal appropri central bank author general discuss exit strategi good time order prepar market adequ econom condit recov financi market stabilis need extraordinari monetari polici measur diminish discuss explain exit strategi implement serv remind take place except measur last ever particular bank start think stand feet soon resort tradit sourc financ allow summaris main point today go synchronis sever downturn sinc world war ii sinc last autumn global economi gradual recov uncertainti still high situat improv remark quick number financi market also take account declin fast even dramat month lehman bankruptci nevertheless cannot rule recent buoyant develop asset price driven ampl liquid situat financi market central bank done job ampl liquid made avail help euro area economi recov look ahead take account improv condit financi market liquid measur need extent past said number occas make sure extraordinari liquid measur phase time gradual fashion liquid absorb avoid threat price stabil medium longer term import financi sector take advantag current situat complet restructur equip stand feet support economi way recoveri prioriti current junctur thank attent would like thank e w nordbo g cambaméndez cabral l cappiello input remain respons opinion see instanc f mishkin bubbl present risk recoveri financi time novemb rajan r financi develop made world riskier speech deliv symposium sponsor feder reserv bank kansa citi jackson hole wyom reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en