"Vítor Constâncio: Macro-prudential policy: strengthening the foundations, enhancing the toolkit and taking action",05-10-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,3804,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen, It is a great pleasure to speak to you at the first conference of the Macro-prudential Research Network (MaRs). I would like to thank the organisers for this very important and timely gathering, which marks the first year of the network. The sources and the propagation of the financial crisis have proven the need for macro-prudential policies to address systemic risk, as well as take account of the interplay between the financial system and the real economy. New institutions have been put in place, such as the European System of Financial Supervision and the Financial Stability Oversight Council in the United States, and regulatory reforms are taking shape, notably Basel III and a host of other initiatives under the leadership of the Financial Stability Board. However, it is also very clear that in the macro-prudential field we are in a much less comfortable position than in the monetary policy field, in particular concerning widely accepted scientific foundations and long experience with tested policy instruments.Against this background, I will start by providing a brief overview of the research that has been carried out in the MaRs network. I will then focus on one important operational tool that we are pushing forward at the European Central Bank (ECB) to assess systemic risks: our top-down stress-testing framework. I will conclude by referring to a key aspect of our future regulatory framework in Europe, namely the set of macro-prudential policy instruments embedded in the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD) IV, and how these instruments should be made compatible with the requirements for both safeguarding financial stability and further developing the Single Market for financial services.The rudimentary state of the scientific foundations in the macro-prudential field led the 27 EU national central banks and the ECB, which constitute the majority of the member institutions of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), to establish a network of researchers working on macroprudential issues called MaRs – standing for Macro-prudential Research, but in a way also referring to a journey into unknown territory. The objective of MaRs is to develop core conceptual frameworks, models and tools to improve macro-prudential supervision in the EU. Through MaRs, we hope to fill some of the identified analytical gaps ourselves and also to act as a catalyst for more and better-targeted academic research in this field. This conference today is the first public event organised by MaRs. The papers presented here are only a small sample of the research conducted. Many more projects are under way and we envisage publishing all papers produced in the ECB Working Paper Series.The network has been charged with conducting research in three areas where gaps were identified and the need for analytical support for policy choices seemed greater. The first MaRs work area deals with the development of macro-financial models linking financial instability and the performance of the economy. A large part of this workstream is aimed at providing relatively fundamental research and therefore not immediately operational policy tools. The first three sessions of the conference feature papers from this workstream. The modelling of bank defaults is crucial to characterising financial instability. In the paper by Eichberger et al. the authors analyse the endogenous and interconnected nature of default risk, therefore implying that models that treat default risk as exogenous may be subject to significant biases and mistakes. Another fundamental topic is the shadow banking sector. The model by Goodhart et al. includes the presence of a shadow banking system, which holds securitised assets issued by the traditional banking system that are subject to default. The analysis explores how different types of financial regulation would perform in the event of many of the phenomena that were observed during the financial crisis.A lot of attention has been devoted recently to the debt and leverage ratios of financial intermediaries and to their variation over the business cycle. The dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model proposed by Rannenberg shows that in presence of a costly bankruptcy and moral hazard between banks and their depositors, the yield requested on loans is affected by the leverage of both the borrower and the lender. This set-up is helpful in understanding the sources of the leverage cycle, since the response of the external finance premium and the overall economy to monetary policy and productivity shocks is greatly amplified. Another area of particular interest is the analysis of the interactions between monetary and macro-prudential policies. The estimated DSGE model with financial frictions by Beau et al. shows that the combination of an independent macro-prudential policy leaning against “excessive” credit growth and a monetary policy focusing on inflation is the best response to asset price or credit supply shocks to maintain price stability. In addition, a monetary policy taking into account any macroeconomic effects resulting from macro-prudential policies will optimise general welfare.The paper by Lambertini et al. examines in particular the effects of monetary and macro-prudential policies that lean against boom-bust cycles in housing and credit. They show that counter-cyclical -loan-to-value rules responding to credit growth do not increase inflation volatility and are effective in maintaining financial stability. However, a welfare comparison between the impact of an extended interest rate rule – including financial variables – and counter-cyclical loan-to-value ratios leads to ambiguous results, as lenders and borrowers are affected in opposite ways. This suggests a strong need for cooperation between monetary and macro-prudential authorities to avoid conflicting policies. Let me now turn briefly to the area of MaRs dealing with early warning models and systemic risk indicators, which is the theme of sessions V and VI. The results of this workstream suggest that the value of early warning indicators has increased thanks to improved methodologies and the use of less exploited data sources. It should also be added that the focus has been shifted somewhat from predicting crises to predicting growing imbalances, which has most likely contributed to the greater effectiveness of new early warning tools. A number of studies examine the variables to be included in estimated models in order to improve forecasting ability. Fornari and Lemke, and Abildgren examine the predictive value of financial variables. More generally, the work carried out by MaRs researchers shows how the predictive information can be improved by using individual balance sheet data of financial firms combined with traditional macro-financial variables. Concerning specific indicators, the merit of private credit gaps and the role of global variables in early warnings has been confirmed, while the performance of bank solvency and liquidity ratios in this regard is still under debate.Very valuable information for policy-makers comes from the measurement of the current level of systemic financial stress. Again, it seems that valuable indications arise from the use of firm balance sheet data combined with financial market data, as is the case for the indicator given by Louzis and Vouldis. Other studies emphasise that, for example, the decoupling of credit risk conditions of financial firms from the macro-financial environment can serve as an early warning indicator of systemic stress. The third area in which the MaRs network seeks to achieve progress is the assessment of contagion risks, addressed in Session IV. In this context the analysis of the interbank market is crucial, and the paper by Memmel and his co-authors provides very useful insights. They confirm previous evidence of tiering in the case of Germany, where some banks distribute liquidity to others. Moreover, a relatively large share of default cases result either in a tiny loss or in a very large loss. This stands in contrast to the usual assumption that loss-given-default averages about 40% and adds an element of fragility to the interbank system. Overall, more extensive research on risks from cross-border bank contagion in Europe is still held back by data limitations, which we hope will continue to relax over time. A large project assessing cross-border financial links using TARGET2 data and involving researchers from several central banks is just starting under MaRs.Beyond MaRs’ research in a cross-institutional context, a lot more analytical macro-prudential work is undertaken here at the ECB, as at other central banks. Our main aim with this work is to be in a position to carry out systemic risk assessments in real time, directly and regularly supporting policy discussions. For this we have at our disposal a number of tools and techniques which help to assess and quantify the impact of systemic risks on the banking sector and ultimately on the real economy. This enables us to rank, according to their severity, the systemic risks we have identified at any point in time.I will now specifically focus on the top-down stress-testing framework developed by the ECB, which is one of our major tools. This toolkit has proven particularly valuable during the recent financial crisis and the ongoing sovereign debt crisis. Systemic risks emerged, intensified and evolved rapidly, calling for a flexible and operational tool that could deliver quantified impact assessments in a timely fashion. The tool is comprehensive enough to cover individual banks and it incorporates real-financial interactions. The ECB top-down stress tests are a regular contribution to ESRB meetings. The analysis provided by the tests is also used to support the financial stability assessments in the ECB’s Financial Stability Review and also for background policy analyses. Importantly, our top-down stress test results were used as an input for the “peer review” process of the European Banking Authority (EBA) 2011 EU-wide stress testing exercise. The top-down analysis provided a basis for benchmarking and, where necessary, to challenge the results of the bottom-up exercise. For instance, the top-down stress test uses common methodologies and assumptions across all banks, whereas the bottom-up approach allows for some heterogeneity across banks with respect to certain assumptions and applications, such as the use of banks’ own internal credit risk models. The top-down assessment can therefore be employed to capture outlier results of individual banks in the bottom-up stress test. The current ECB top-down macro stress testing consists of a number of distinct but interrelated building blocks. They can be grouped into four broad areas reflecting different stages of the process.  First, a macro-financial scenario building block. The identified sources of systemic risks facing the EU banking sector need to be translated into specific shocks that drive macro and financial variables. Subsequently, an adverse macroeconomic scenario is derived, by computing the effects on the economy of these, exogenous, shocks. A topical example of such exogenous shocks could be contagion in the euro area sovereign debt market tensions. This could be simulated through increases in government bond spreads of different euro area countries, which in turn would have adverse effects on the general macroeconomic outlook, resulting in a decline in GDP compared with a baseline scenario. This translation of shocks to macro-financial scenarios is done using a variety of tools, ranging from in-house large-scale macro models to smaller time-series models. An especially useful and flexible multi-country, EU-wide, macro simulation tool is our set of “stress test elasticities” (STEs). This provides impulse response functions of endogenous variables to a set of pre-defined exogenous shocks. For example, a shock to EU external demand – perhaps arising from confidence-driven developments in the United States – would lead to differentiated effects on GDP and other domestic demand variables across EU countries, with the impact depending on country-specific factors, such as the degree of trade openness. However, we do not have a single preferred choice for the macro-financial scenario simulation tool, but rather select from the wide menu of models available at the ECB, depending on the specific scenario we want to construct. Over time, models developed by researchers in Workstream 1 of MaRs could also be applied to inform our macro-financial scenario design. Second, a benchmark parameter block. The macro-financial scenario will in turn affect the banking sector through a number of channels including the impact on banks’ credit portfolios, their trading book and the various components of profits. In practice, this transmission is performed via a number of satellite models. The impact is three-fold, affecting credit risk, market risk and bank profitability. Our efforts so far have focused on deriving properly modelled credit risk parameters (that is, probabilities of default and loss-given-default rates from which loss rates are calculated). We have invested heavily in this area because credit risk still is the main risk component for most European banks. Regarding market risk, the benchmark parameter calibration techniques we have developed have mostly concerned the computation of haircuts on banks’ sovereign debt holdings. (This uses a model that was specifically constructed for and used in the last two EBA EU-wide stress testing exercises.). Finally, regarding the modelling of bank profitability, we currently focus much of our efforts on simulating net interest income, because this remains the most important profit component for the majority of EU banks. Other items affecting bank earnings, such as trading income, fees and commissions, taxes and dividend policies, are generally based on judgemental assumptions or extrapolations.  Third, the balance sheet part of the framework. This third module includes models to estimate loan losses and tools to simulate banks’ balance sheet items (accounting and regulatory) as well as their profit and loss statements to calculate the impact on banks’ capitalisation. As the modelling framework is based on a bank-by-bank assessment of individual banks’ balance sheets, it is flexible with respect to the geographical coverage in the EU or euro area. Fourth, contagion and feedback effects. Typically, stress tests (including the EBA EU-wide exercise) do not look beyond the first-order impact on banks’ solvency positions. However, identified capital shortfalls likely have repercussions beyond such immediate effects at the individual bank level. Hence, our fourth building block, which is still the least developed, concerns the modelling of contagion from banks failing the stress test to other banks (via various forms of counterparty exposure) and, more broadly, also to other economic sectors (using a flow-of-funds-based propagation tool). In addition, real economic feedbacks are modelled via reductions in loan supply by capital-constrained banks. Operationally, this is typically done by feeding our stress test results into some of our large-scale macro models that include an active banking sector and thus can adequately capture the real-financial linkages. Nonetheless, further modelling enhancements are warranted in this fourth building block, and for this purpose we will continue to closely monitor the progress in the tools developed in Workstreams 1 and 3 of MaRs. Having described the various building blocks, let me furthermore emphasise that our framework is based entirely on publicly available consolidated bank-level data; no supervisory information is employed in our set-up. Our analytical framework should also not be mistaken for the constrained “bottom-up” approach adopted by the EBA for its annual EU-wide stress test. The EBA stress testing exercise is carried out at the bank level and applying granular bank level data only available to the banks and their national supervisors. Compared with supervisory stress tests carried out between banks and their home supervisors, the EBA bottom-up stress test is “constrained” in the sense of using a common scenario across all banks and to a large extent also relies on common methodologies.Bottom-up and top-down stress tests should not be directly juxtaposed, as a one-to-one mapping of their results is not possible. Rather they should be seen as complementary tools to assess the resilience of the financial sector; they are characterised by different strengths and weaknesses. Importantly, although top-down stress tests are far from perfect and suffer from many deficiencies, they are a useful tool to challenge the more granular bottom-up approaches and especially to detect outlier responses by individual banks in the latter case. I would like to conclude by turning to the design of policy instruments that authorities may use to address the risks identified by various analytical tools.As a consequence of the lessons learned from the crisis, the focus of financial regulation has gradually shifted towards a macro-prudential approach, a key element of which is the establishment of authorities with macro-prudential mandates at both the national and the international level. In the EU context, the ESRB has been operational since the beginning of this year. The ESRB is currently working on developing a macro-prudential toolkit of policy instruments that authorities can use to address systemic risks.Moreover, the Basel III regulatory framework – considered the cornerstone of the global regulatory reform for banks and endorsed by the G20 leaders last year – already includes some elements of a macro-prudential toolkit. Indeed, the counter-cyclical capital buffer can be considered as a predominantly macro-prudential tool. The capital buffer will be built up in periods of excessive credit growth and released in stress situations, thus introducing a counter-cyclical element in financial regulation.Other elements of a macro-prudential toolkit fall primarily in the domain of what is traditionally micro-prudential supervision. We have capital and liquidity rules which aim to mitigate risks at the level of individual institutions, but which could, in principle, be recalibrated to address macro-prudential concerns as well.With the aim of implementing Basel III, the European Commission recently published a rulebook, known as “CRD IV”. This includes a proposal for two new legal acts: a directive, which needs to be implemented in each Member State, with provisions on the authorisation and supervision of credit institutions and investment firms; and a regulation laying down the prudential standards which will have direct application across the EU.Recently, concerns have been raised with regard to the ability of authorities to use micro-prudential tools for macro-prudential purposes if the capital and liquidity rules are introduced as a directly applicable regulation in the EU. This would imply not only a minimum but also a “maximum harmonisation” of prudential requirements, in that a country could adopt neither more nor less stringent implementations of the policy instruments.The maximum harmonisation approach aims to ensure a consistent implementation of prudential measures in the Single Market. It ensures that a level playing field for financial institutions will be established through a single rulebook, thus avoiding regulatory arbitrage and distortions to competition. Furthermore, the harmonised rules also support financial integration and improve transparency. Finally, this approach also reduces regulatory costs as well as banks’ compliance costs. Given the substantial benefits of greater financial integration, the ECB has consistently supported the “single rulebook” approach for financial regulation, with the aim of promoting the smooth functioning of the Single Market.At the same time, however, let me underline that, for financial stability reasons, it is desirable that national authorities have the possibility to impose a more stringent calibration of capital requirements and a few other requirements than those proposed in the regulation. The need for such a macro-prudential framework overlay is justified by the fact that different countries are at different stages of the cycle within Europe, potentially facing different types of systemic risk. Authorities therefore need a certain degree of national discretion to calibrate the given set of macro-prudential policy instruments to their specific cyclical situation, i.e. to address the time dimension of systemic risk. There are also significant differences in the structural importance of the financial sector or the size of the banking sector relative to GDP across EU countries, which may translate into different levels of systemic risk at a given point in time. Authorities may thus need appropriate tools with which to address the cross-sectional dimension of systemic risks as well.However, given that regulations are directly applicable and Member States cannot modify them or add provisions unless this is explicitly provided for in the regulation itself, I am of the view that the establishment of a general macro-prudential regime in the Capital Requirement Regulation is warranted. This macro-prudential regime should have three main features:First, adjustments should only be possible in the direction of strengthening the harmonised minima.Second, and as mentioned earlier, only calibrations should be subject to upward adjustment. Definitions should be maintained, thus respecting the principle of an EU rulebook. Third, this macro-prudential regime should be subject to strict safeguards, under the ex ante coordination of the ESRB. The purpose of this coordination before new calibrations are introduced by individual countries is to guard against possible unintended consequences and spillover effects. These safeguards could include the identification of the macro-prudential concerns in the respective countries and confirmation by the ESRB. Deviations should be subject to close monitoring by the ESRB as well as to disclosure requirements. Finally, when the macro-prudential concerns cease to exist, the calibrations should return to the harmonised minimum in the EU rulebook. This should provide macro-prudential authorities with the flexibility required to preserve financial stability while including safeguards against adverse side-effects on other countries and, ultimately, possible impairments of the Single Market for financial services in the EU.More generally, let me highlight that, while most of the arguments put forward against a more stringent national calibration tend to stress the potential trade-offs between financial integration and financial stability, this may not always be the case. The occasional introduction of more stringently implemented macro-prudential measures by specific countries under the aegis of the ESRB may actually enhance both financial stability and financial integration by protecting the Single Market from excessive boom-bust cycles. By avoiding, or at least mitigating, such cyclical swings, macro-prudential authorities may effectively contribute to the smooth functioning of the EU financial system and the Single Market in the medium to long term.The work of the MaRs is an important contribution to a new pillar of policies that the crisis showed to be indispensable. As you can see, the ECB follows your work with great interest. I wish you a very fruitful conference. Many thanks for your attention. Abildgren, K., “Business cycles, Monetary Transmission and Shocks to Financial Stability – Empirical evidence from a new set of Danish quarterly national accounts 1948-2010”. Danmarks Nationalbank Working Paper No 71, 2010.Beau, D., L. Clerc, and B. Mojon, “Macro-Prudential Policy and The Conduct Of Monetary Policy”. Banque de France, Occasional Papers No 8, 2011.Eichberger, J., K. Rheinberger, and M. Summer, “Credit Risk in General Equilibrium”. University of Heidelberg, University of Applied Sciences Vorarlberg and Oesterreichische Nationalbank, mimeo, 2011.Fornari, F., and W. Lemke, “Predicting Recession Probabilities With Financial Variables Over Multiple Horizons”, ECB Working Paper Series No 1255, 2010.Goodhart, C. A. E., A. Kashyap, D. P. Tsomocos, and A. P. Vardoulakis, “Financial Regulation in General Equilibrium”, London School of Economics, University of Chicago, University of Oxford and Banque de France, mimeo, 2011.Lambertini, L., C. Mendicino, and M. T. Punzi, “Leaning Against Boom-Bust Cycles in Credit and Housing Prices”, Working Paper 8/11, Banco de Portugal, 2011.Louzis, D., and A. Vouldis, “Financial Stress Index for the Greek Banking System”, Bank of Greece, mimeo, 2011.Memmel, C., A. Sachs, and I. Stein, “Contagion at the interbank market with stochastic LGD”, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper Series 2: Banking and Financial Studies, No 06, 2011.Rannenberg, A. “Asymmetric Information in Credit Markets, Bank Leverage Cycles and Macroeconomic Dynamics”, Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique, mimeo 2011.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur speak first confer macroprudenti research network mar would like thank organis import time gather mark first year network sourc propag financi crisi proven need macroprudenti polici address system risk well take account interplay financi system real economi new institut put place european system financi supervis financi stabil oversight council unit state regulatori reform take shape notabl basel iii host initi leadership financi stabil board howev also clear macroprudenti field much less comfort posit monetari polici field particular concern wide accept scientif foundat long experi test polici instrument background start provid brief overview research carri mar network focus one import oper tool push forward european central bank ecb assess system risk topdown stresstest framework conclud refer key aspect futur regulatori framework europ name set macroprudenti polici instrument embed capit requir direct crd iv instrument made compat requir safeguard financi stabil develop singl market financi servic rudimentari state scientif foundat macroprudenti field led eu nation central bank ecb constitut major member institut european system risk board esrb establish network research work macroprudenti issu call mar stand macroprudenti research way also refer journey unknown territori object mar develop core conceptu framework model tool improv macroprudenti supervis eu mar hope fill identifi analyt gap also act catalyst bettertarget academ research field confer today first public event organis mar paper present small sampl research conduct mani project way envisag publish paper produc ecb work paper seri network charg conduct research three area gap identifi need analyt support polici choic seem greater first mar work area deal develop macrofinanci model link financi instabl perform economi larg part workstream aim provid relat fundament research therefor immedi oper polici tool first three session confer featur paper workstream model bank default crucial characteris financi instabl paper eichberg et al author analys endogen interconnect natur default risk therefor impli model treat default risk exogen may subject signific bias mistak anoth fundament topic shadow bank sector model goodhart et al includ presenc shadow bank system hold securitis asset issu tradit bank system subject default analysi explor differ type financi regul would perform event mani phenomena observ financi crisi lot attent devot recent debt leverag ratio financi intermediari variat busi cycl dynam stochast general equilibrium dsge model propos rannenberg show presenc cost bankruptci moral hazard bank depositor yield request loan affect leverag borrow lender setup help understand sourc leverag cycl sinc respons extern financ premium overal economi monetari polici product shock great amplifi anoth area particular interest analysi interact monetari macroprudenti polici estim dsge model financi friction beau et al show combin independ macroprudenti polici lean excess credit growth monetari polici focus inflat best respons asset price credit suppli shock maintain price stabil addit monetari polici take account macroeconom effect result macroprudenti polici optimis general welfar paper lambertini et al examin particular effect monetari macroprudenti polici lean boombust cycl hous credit show countercycl loantovalu rule respond credit growth increas inflat volatil effect maintain financi stabil howev welfar comparison impact extend interest rate rule includ financi variabl countercycl loantovalu ratio lead ambigu result lender borrow affect opposit way suggest strong need cooper monetari macroprudenti author avoid conflict polici let turn briefli area mar deal earli warn model system risk indic theme session v vi result workstream suggest valu earli warn indic increas thank improv methodolog use less exploit data sourc also ad focus shift somewhat predict crise predict grow imbal like contribut greater effect new earli warn tool number studi examin variabl includ estim model order improv forecast abil fornari lemk abildgren examin predict valu financi variabl general work carri mar research show predict inform improv use individu balanc sheet data financi firm combin tradit macrofinanci variabl concern specif indic merit privat credit gap role global variabl earli warn confirm perform bank solvenc liquid ratio regard still debat valuabl inform policymak come measur current level system financi stress seem valuabl indic aris use firm balanc sheet data combin financi market data case indic given louzi vouldi studi emphasis exampl decoupl credit risk condit financi firm macrofinanci environ serv earli warn indic system stress third area mar network seek achiev progress assess contagion risk address session iv context analysi interbank market crucial paper memmel coauthor provid use insight confirm previous evid tier case germani bank distribut liquid other moreov relat larg share default case result either tini loss larg loss stand contrast usual assumpt lossgivendefault averag add element fragil interbank system overal extens research risk crossbord bank contagion europ still held back data limit hope continu relax time larg project assess crossbord financi link use target data involv research sever central bank start mar beyond mar research crossinstitut context lot analyt macroprudenti work undertaken ecb central bank main aim work posit carri system risk assess real time direct regular support polici discuss dispos number tool techniqu help assess quantifi impact system risk bank sector ultim real economi enabl us rank accord sever system risk identifi point time specif focus topdown stresstest framework develop ecb one major tool toolkit proven particular valuabl recent financi crisi ongo sovereign debt crisi system risk emerg intensifi evolv rapid call flexibl oper tool could deliv quantifi impact assess time fashion tool comprehens enough cover individu bank incorpor realfinanci interact ecb topdown stress test regular contribut esrb meet analysi provid test also use support financi stabil assess ecb financi stabil review also background polici analys import topdown stress test result use input peer review process european bank author eba euwid stress test exercis topdown analysi provid basi benchmark necessari challeng result bottomup exercis instanc topdown stress test use common methodolog assumpt across bank wherea bottomup approach allow heterogen across bank respect certain assumpt applic use bank intern credit risk model topdown assess therefor employ captur outlier result individu bank bottomup stress test current ecb topdown macro stress test consist number distinct interrel build block group four broad area reflect differ stage process first macrofinanci scenario build block identifi sourc system risk face eu bank sector need translat specif shock drive macro financi variabl subsequ advers macroeconom scenario deriv comput effect economi exogen shock topic exampl exogen shock could contagion euro area sovereign debt market tension could simul increas govern bond spread differ euro area countri turn would advers effect general macroeconom outlook result declin gdp compar baselin scenario translat shock macrofinanci scenario done use varieti tool rang inhous largescal macro model smaller timeseri model especi use flexibl multicountri euwid macro simul tool set stress test elast stes provid impuls respons function endogen variabl set predefin exogen shock exampl shock eu extern demand perhap aris confidencedriven develop unit state would lead differenti effect gdp domest demand variabl across eu countri impact depend countryspecif factor degre trade open howev singl prefer choic macrofinanci scenario simul tool rather select wide menu model avail ecb depend specif scenario want construct time model develop research workstream mar could also appli inform macrofinanci scenario design second benchmark paramet block macrofinanci scenario turn affect bank sector number channel includ impact bank credit portfolio trade book various compon profit practic transmiss perform via number satellit model impact threefold affect credit risk market risk bank profit effort far focus deriv proper model credit risk paramet probabl default lossgivendefault rate loss rate calcul invest heavili area credit risk still main risk compon european bank regard market risk benchmark paramet calibr techniqu develop most concern comput haircut bank sovereign debt hold use model specif construct use last two eba euwid stress test exercis final regard model bank profit current focus much effort simul net interest incom remain import profit compon major eu bank item affect bank earn trade incom fee commiss tax dividend polici general base judgement assumpt extrapol third balanc sheet part framework third modul includ model estim loan loss tool simul bank balanc sheet item account regulatori well profit loss statement calcul impact bank capitalis model framework base bankbybank assess individu bank balanc sheet flexibl respect geograph coverag eu euro area fourth contagion feedback effect typic stress test includ eba euwid exercis look beyond firstord impact bank solvenc posit howev identifi capit shortfal like repercuss beyond immedi effect individu bank level henc fourth build block still least develop concern model contagion bank fail stress test bank via various form counterparti exposur broad also econom sector use flowoffundsbas propag tool addit real econom feedback model via reduct loan suppli capitalconstrain bank oper typic done feed stress test result largescal macro model includ activ bank sector thus adequ captur realfinanci linkag nonetheless model enhanc warrant fourth build block purpos continu close monitor progress tool develop workstream mar describ various build block let furthermor emphasis framework base entir public avail consolid banklevel data supervisori inform employ setup analyt framework also mistaken constrain bottomup approach adopt eba annual euwid stress test eba stress test exercis carri bank level appli granular bank level data avail bank nation supervisor compar supervisori stress test carri bank home supervisor eba bottomup stress test constrain sens use common scenario across bank larg extent also reli common methodolog bottomup topdown stress test direct juxtapos onetoon map result possibl rather seen complementari tool assess resili financi sector characteris differ strength weak import although topdown stress test far perfect suffer mani defici use tool challeng granular bottomup approach especi detect outlier respons individu bank latter case would like conclud turn design polici instrument author may use address risk identifi various analyt tool consequ lesson learn crisi focus financi regul gradual shift toward macroprudenti approach key element establish author macroprudenti mandat nation intern level eu context esrb oper sinc begin year esrb current work develop macroprudenti toolkit polici instrument author use address system risk moreov basel iii regulatori framework consid cornerston global regulatori reform bank endors g leader last year alreadi includ element macroprudenti toolkit inde countercycl capit buffer consid predomin macroprudenti tool capit buffer built period excess credit growth releas stress situat thus introduc countercycl element financi regul element macroprudenti toolkit fall primarili domain tradit microprudenti supervis capit liquid rule aim mitig risk level individu institut could principl recalibr address macroprudenti concern well aim implement basel iii european commiss recent publish rulebook known crd iv includ propos two new legal act direct need implement member state provis authoris supervis credit institut invest firm regul lay prudenti standard direct applic across eu recent concern rais regard abil author use microprudenti tool macroprudenti purpos capit liquid rule introduc direct applic regul eu would impli minimum also maximum harmonis prudenti requir countri could adopt neither less stringent implement polici instrument maximum harmonis approach aim ensur consist implement prudenti measur singl market ensur level play field financi institut establish singl rulebook thus avoid regulatori arbitrag distort competit furthermor harmonis rule also support financi integr improv transpar final approach also reduc regulatori cost well bank complianc cost given substanti benefit greater financi integr ecb consist support singl rulebook approach financi regul aim promot smooth function singl market time howev let underlin financi stabil reason desir nation author possibl impos stringent calibr capit requir requir propos regul need macroprudenti framework overlay justifi fact differ countri differ stage cycl within europ potenti face differ type system risk author therefor need certain degre nation discret calibr given set macroprudenti polici instrument specif cyclic situat e address time dimens system risk also signific differ structur import financi sector size bank sector relat gdp across eu countri may translat differ level system risk given point time author may thus need appropri tool address crosssect dimens system risk well howev given regul direct applic member state cannot modifi add provis unless explicit provid regul view establish general macroprudenti regim capit requir regul warrant macroprudenti regim three main featur first adjust possibl direct strengthen harmonis minima second mention earlier calibr subject upward adjust definit maintain thus respect principl eu rulebook third macroprudenti regim subject strict safeguard ex ant coordin esrb purpos coordin new calibr introduc individu countri guard possibl unintend consequ spillov effect safeguard could includ identif macroprudenti concern respect countri confirm esrb deviat subject close monitor esrb well disclosur requir final macroprudenti concern ceas exist calibr return harmonis minimum eu rulebook provid macroprudenti author flexibl requir preserv financi stabil includ safeguard advers sideeffect countri ultim possibl impair singl market financi servic eu general let highlight argument put forward stringent nation calibr tend stress potenti tradeoff financi integr financi stabil may alway case occasion introduct stringent implement macroprudenti measur specif countri aegi esrb may actual enhanc financi stabil financi integr protect singl market excess boombust cycl avoid least mitig cyclic swing macroprudenti author may effect contribut smooth function eu financi system singl market medium long term work mar import contribut new pillar polici crisi show indispens see ecb follow work great interest wish fruit confer mani thank attent abildgren k busi cycl monetari transmiss shock financi stabil empir evid new set danish quarter nation account danmark nationalbank work paper beau d l clerc b mojon macroprudenti polici conduct monetari polici banqu de franc occasion paper eichberg j k rheinberg m summer credit risk general equilibrium univers heidelberg univers appli scienc vorarlberg oesterreichisch nationalbank mimeo fornari f w lemk predict recess probabl financi variabl multipl horizon ecb work paper seri goodhart c e kashyap d p tsomoco p vardoulaki financi regul general equilibrium london school econom univers chicago univers oxford banqu de franc mimeo lambertini l c mendicino m punzi lean boombust cycl credit hous price work paper banco de portug louzi d vouldi financi stress index greek bank system bank greec mimeo memmel c sach stein contagion interbank market stochast lgd deutsch bundesbank discuss paper seri bank financi studi rannenberg asymmetr inform credit market bank leverag cycl macroeconom dynam national bank van belgiëbanqu national de belgiqu mimeo reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en