José Manuel González-Páramo: Address for the 2008 Bernácer Prize Award Ceremony in honour of Markus Brunnermeier,10-06-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,1640,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen, [1]It is a great pleasure for me to be given the honour of addressing a few words to you on the occasion of this year’s award ceremony of the Bernácer Prize to Professor Markus Brunnermeier from Princeton University. Guillermo de la Dehesa asked me to share some thoughts with you about the importance of scientific research for the European Central Bank and its monetary policy. In this context, I would like to express my appreciation for the influential contributions made by this year’s laureate to the academic debate in fields which are of particular relevance for central bank policymakers. Markus Brunnermeier has to be particularly praised for helping us to improve our understanding of some of the main causes and mechanisms behind the current financial crisis, as well as for his scholarly advice to policymakers and the general public as to how the global financial system can be put on a more stable and solid footing through regulatory reform. But I will revert to this later.Let me first emphasise that research plays a crucial role for the Eurosystem as much as for other central banks. Research provided an essential input to the definition of the ECB’s price-stability monetary policy strategy as well as to the design of its operational framework. Besides, in order to conduct monetary policy on a regular basis, the ECB needs to accumulate knowledge and information on how the dynamics of the economy tend to evolve, how specific markets work, how its policy instrument influences price and output developments through the various transmission chains. Moreover, the ECB also performs core functions and tasks in supporting a smooth operation of payments systems and contributes to safeguarding financial stability which likewise requires substantial theoretical and empirical knowledge. It should go without saying that such detailed information about the financial markets and the economy as a whole mainly originates from research efforts, whether they are undertaken from within or outside the ECB. Admittedly, central banking will certainly always remain an art as much as a science in the sense that a clear rulebook prescribing the best policy action in all specific circumstances does not exist. Uncertainty is simply pervasive. For example, the quantitative knowledge of central banks on the monetary transmission process remains imperfect and fragile due to the preponderance of data, estimation and model uncertainty in macroeconomic model building, compounded by the constant risk of structural change in evolving economies and societies. Central bankers also regularly face situations which are unique and unprecedented, and where the alternative states (or their likelihood) are not really well known or understood. These situations of so-called Knightian uncertainty clearly defy measurement and thus pose challenges for empirically-validated policy advice. In the face of uncertainty, to arrive at a certain decision monetary policymakers need to combine knowledge derived from a variety of models with individual experience and judgement. Notwithstanding this, the way monetary policymakers filter the information they receive and the experiences they have made usually depends on some theoretical concepts adopted and internalised during their professional lives. It is the responsibility of a central bank as an institution to ensure that the fundamental ideas behind actual monetary policymaking reflect as far as possible the “state of the art” of the respective disciplines, and not invalidated or even falsified ideas of some “defunct economist”, to loosely quote from John Maynard Keynes’s famous conclusions to The General Theory.The ECB attempts to cope with this responsibility by fostering a very intense exchange of information and manpower with the academic world at all levels. Leading experts in economics and finance regularly visit the ECB to discuss their most recent findings at seminars, conferences or workshops, often co-hosted with other major central banks and research institutions, as well as to provide consultancy. The members of the Governing Council and the Executive Board of the ECB play an active part themselves in this regular exchange of views between the theory and practice of monetary policy. It should be emphasised that a close relationship between theory and policy making gives rise to cross-fertilisation. Scientific progress definitely improves the conduct of monetary policy and other central bank tasks over time; but it is likewise true that academics often benefit from practitioners´ knowledge of data and institutional detail as well as their broad experience in all aspects of real-world monetary policymaking. Insights from research have been invaluable particularly in times of the biggest financial crisis since the Great Depression. Finding the correct policy prescriptions to alleviate the consequences and resolve the current crisis requires a thorough understanding of the underlying causes. Markus Brunnermeier’s research has played a prominent role here. For instance, his research on bubbles sheds light on how institutional frictions and strategic considerations can lead to significant mispricings of assets. [2] While market participants may be aware of the flawed asset valuation, the lack of common knowledge can lead to a build up of the bubble and hinder its bursting. This approach departs from the conventional market efficiency view that rational traders will immediately stabilise prices by shortening overvalued assets and, by contrast, integrates important aspects of trading behaviour into the mainstream of economics and finance.When a bubble bursts and risk is re-assessed, financial institutions suffer losses. In the current crisis, uncertainty over the size and location of exposures of banks or bank-sponsored conduits to “toxic” assets translated into funding liquidity problems. A paper by Brunnermeier and Pedersen, “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity” explains how such funding problems can affect market liquidity and lead to mutually reinforcing liquidity spirals. [3] Balance sheet constraints of financial intermediaries can naturally lead to market illiquidity and the expectations of future liquidity risk can lead to panic and more asset price declines. Indeed, liquidity shortage was one of the key propagation mechanisms of the current crisis which illustrates a negative externality that fire-sales by individual institutions can impose on the financial system as a whole. It is also one of the factors that contributed to prolonged tensions in the interbank market as banks were reluctant to lend to each other to minimise counterparty exposures. These markets are crucial for banks’ liquidity management and also for the transmission of monetary policy. The work on funding and market liquidity also offers possible mechanisms for the resolution of liquidity spirals. The key policy prescription is to improve the funding liquidity of financial institutions in order to prevent solvent institutions from being driven out of business by protracted illiquidity. This policy has been followed extensively by the Eurosystem over the recent past.Liquidity spirals also create an important pro-cyclical mechanism in the financial system. This issue is discussed in the draft notes on the next Geneva Report on the World Economy written by Professor Brunnermeier and co-authors on “The fundamental principles of financial regulation”. [4] The policy conclusions include both crisis prevention - with recommendations like the introduction of macro-prudential regulation or liquidity regulation – as well as crisis management with analyses of toxic asset purchases, asset guarantees or mortgage subsidies, for example.Notwithstanding the important theoretical advances to which Markus Brunnermeier contributed substantially, there is still much to be learnt about the root causes, the triggers and the propagation mechanisms of the financial turmoil, and how precisely it spread to the real sector, causing a deep financial and economic crisis arising from negative feedback loops between the two sectors. The severe challenges for policymakers posed by the existing knowledge gaps are reflected in the very controversial debates about the optimal responses to mitigate and resolve the current crisis and to prevent future crises from occurring. Quick progress on these and related research topics is essential for the ECB both from a monetary policy and a financial stability perspective. While at present the ECB already performs certain tasks which shall contribute to safeguarding the stability of the financial system, it is foreseen that the range of tasks and responsibilities of the ECB related to financial stability matters becomes substantially enlarged. According to the recent proposal by the European Commission on the reform of financial supervision in the European Union, drawing on the recommendations of the de Laroisière High-Level Group, the ECB would play an important role in a new European Systemic Risk Board to be in charge of macro-prudential financial supervision in the European Union. For the ECB to effectively perform such tasks requires, among other, major investments into a supporting macro-prudential analytical infrastructure, for example the development and implementation of a suite of early warning signal models and the significant extension of existing macro stress testing models. But we also need innovative approaches on optimal policy responses once macro-prudential risks have been identified, since the European Systemic Risk Council will also have to issue policy recommendations. In contrast to the assessment of systemic risks where we have a basis to build on and where our staff has also made research contributions to the literature, macro-prudential regulation or policy is a relatively new concept for which a good analytical basis still needs to be developed. This is an area where brilliant scholars like Markus Brunnermeier can make an invaluable contribution. And he has already started to do so. I herewith extend my sincerest congratulations to you – Markus – for winning the 2008 Bernácer Prize, which you very much deserve. [1] I am grateful to M. Hoerova and M. Kremer for their input into this speech and to P. Hartmann and F. Smets for comments.[2] Abreu, D. and M. Brunnermeier (2003), “Bubbles and crashes”, in: Econometrica, Vol. 71, No. 1, pp. 173-204.[3] Brunnermeier, M. and L.H. Pedersen (2009), “Market liquidity and funding liquidity”, in: Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 22, No. 6, pp. 2201-2238.[4] Brunnermeier, M., Crockett, A., Goodhart, C., Persaud, A.D. and H. Shin (2009), “The fundamental principles of financial regulation” (preliminary conference draft), Geneva Report on the World Economy 11, January.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur given honour address word occas year award ceremoni bernácer prize professor markus brunnermei princeton univers guillermo de la dehesa ask share thought import scientif research european central bank monetari polici context would like express appreci influenti contribut made year laureat academ debat field particular relev central bank policymak markus brunnermei particular prais help us improv understand main caus mechan behind current financi crisi well scholar advic policymak general public global financi system put stabl solid foot regulatori reform revert later let first emphasis research play crucial role eurosystem much central bank research provid essenti input definit ecb pricest monetari polici strategi well design oper framework besid order conduct monetari polici regular basi ecb need accumul knowledg inform dynam economi tend evolv specif market work polici instrument influenc price output develop various transmiss chain moreov ecb also perform core function task support smooth oper payment system contribut safeguard financi stabil likewis requir substanti theoret empir knowledg go without say detail inform financi market economi whole main origin research effort whether undertaken within outsid ecb admit central bank certain alway remain art much scienc sens clear rulebook prescrib best polici action specif circumst exist uncertainti simpli pervas exampl quantit knowledg central bank monetari transmiss process remain imperfect fragil due preponder data estim model uncertainti macroeconom model build compound constant risk structur chang evolv economi societi central banker also regular face situat uniqu unpreced altern state likelihood realli well known understood situat socal knightian uncertainti clear defi measur thus pose challeng empiricallyvalid polici advic face uncertainti arriv certain decis monetari policymak need combin knowledg deriv varieti model individu experi judgement notwithstand way monetari policymak filter inform receiv experi made usual depend theoret concept adopt internalis profession live respons central bank institut ensur fundament idea behind actual monetari policymak reflect far possibl state art respect disciplin invalid even falsifi idea defunct economist loos quot maynard keyn famous conclus general theori ecb attempt cope respons foster intens exchang inform manpow academ world level lead expert econom financ regular visit ecb discuss recent find seminar confer workshop often cohost major central bank research institut well provid consult member govern council execut board ecb play activ part regular exchang view theori practic monetari polici emphasis close relationship theori polici make give rise crossfertilis scientif progress definit improv conduct monetari polici central bank task time likewis true academ often benefit practition knowledg data institut detail well broad experi aspect realworld monetari policymak insight research invalu particular time biggest financi crisi sinc great depress find correct polici prescript allevi consequ resolv current crisi requir thorough understand under caus markus brunnermei research play promin role instanc research bubbl shed light institut friction strateg consider lead signific mispric asset market particip may awar flaw asset valuat lack common knowledg lead build bubbl hinder burst approach depart convent market effici view ration trader immedi stabilis price shorten overvalu asset contrast integr import aspect trade behaviour mainstream econom financ bubbl burst risk reassess financi institut suffer loss current crisi uncertainti size locat exposur bank banksponsor conduit toxic asset translat fund liquid problem paper brunnermei pedersen market liquid fund liquid explain fund problem affect market liquid lead mutual reinforc liquid spiral balanc sheet constraint financi intermediari natur lead market illiquid expect futur liquid risk lead panic asset price declin inde liquid shortag one key propag mechan current crisi illustr negat extern firesal individu institut impos financi system whole also one factor contribut prolong tension interbank market bank reluct lend minimis counterparti exposur market crucial bank liquid manag also transmiss monetari polici work fund market liquid also offer possibl mechan resolut liquid spiral key polici prescript improv fund liquid financi institut order prevent solvent institut driven busi protract illiquid polici follow extens eurosystem recent past liquid spiral also creat import procycl mechan financi system issu discuss draft note next geneva report world economi written professor brunnermei coauthor fundament principl financi regul polici conclus includ crisi prevent recommend like introduct macroprudenti regul liquid regul well crisi manag analys toxic asset purchas asset guarante mortgag subsidi exampl notwithstand import theoret advanc markus brunnermei contribut substanti still much learnt root caus trigger propag mechan financi turmoil precis spread real sector caus deep financi econom crisi aris negat feedback loop two sector sever challeng policymak pose exist knowledg gap reflect controversi debat optim respons mitig resolv current crisi prevent futur crise occur quick progress relat research topic essenti ecb monetari polici financi stabil perspect present ecb alreadi perform certain task shall contribut safeguard stabil financi system foreseen rang task respons ecb relat financi stabil matter becom substanti enlarg accord recent propos european commiss reform financi supervis european union draw recommend de laroisièr highlevel group ecb would play import role new european system risk board charg macroprudenti financi supervis european union ecb effect perform task requir among major invest support macroprudenti analyt infrastructur exampl develop implement suit earli warn signal model signific extens exist macro stress test model also need innov approach optim polici respons macroprudenti risk identifi sinc european system risk council also issu polici recommend contrast assess system risk basi build staff also made research contribut literatur macroprudenti regul polici relat new concept good analyt basi still need develop area brilliant scholar like markus brunnermei make invalu contribut alreadi start herewith extend sincerest congratul markus win bernácer prize much deserv grate m hoerova m kremer input speech p hartmann f smet comment abreu d m brunnermei bubbl crash econometrica vol pp brunnermei m l h pedersen market liquid fund liquid review financi studi vol pp brunnermei m crockett goodhart c persaud d h shin fundament principl financi regul preliminari confer draft geneva report world economi januari reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en