Vítor Constâncio: Establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism; the first pillar of the Banking Union,31-01-2013,European Central Bank,ECB,2019,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,It is a great pleasure to be here today. The crisis has made it clear that a highly interconnected and integrated area such as the euro area, and a genuine Economic and Monetary Union needed a stronger institutional framework. An important element to strengthen the financial institutional framework is the creation of the Banking Union with the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) representing its first pillar. During my intervention today I will touch upon the different elements of the Banking Union and the underlying rationale for its establishment. Subsequently, I will review the main features of the SSM and mention the immediate challenges for the ECB to prepare itself to assume its supervisory task. The Banking Union aims at building an integrated financial framework to safeguard financial stability and minimise the cost of bank failures. It consists of four complementary building blocks, of which the SSM forms an integral part. The establishment of a European framework for Supervision forms the first pillar of the Banking Union. As implied by its name, the SSM will be a mechanism, composed of national competent authorities and the ECB, with possibility of non-euro area Member States to participate. The process to establish the SSM is underway, with the Council proposal forming the basis for the current trialogue with the European Parliament. I am quite pleased with the Council’s proposal as it lays down a robust legal framework for the SSM to operate in. In order to ensure a timely implementation it is now of the essence that the proposal is enacted as soon as possible.An important element that will be supportive to the effectiveness of the SSM, is the completion of the single rulebook whose implementation is overseen by the EBA  The completion of the single rulebook will significantly contribute to the single market and towards creating a level playing field by harmonising regulation at the European Union level. Likewise, the SSM will also contribute to these same goals. A second element of the Banking Union is the establishment of a Single Resolution Mechanism. The framework for the Single Resolution Mechanism is still to be defined and I look forward to the Commission’s upcoming legislative proposal. Let me nevertheless highlight the main features that in my view such a Mechanism should have. The Single Resolution Mechanism would have a Single Resolution Authority at its centre that would govern the resolution namely of significant banks, coordinate the application of resolution tools and reflect an organisational set-up similar to the SSM. It should have a comprehensive set of enforceable tools, powers and authority to resolve all banks in the SSM. In order for the Single Resolution Mechanism to be perceived as credible, it should have sufficient funding. Let me be very clear I am not talking about bailing-out banks with public money. Resolution is about orderly resolving the situation of banks that have attained the point of non-viability and about doing it in a way that minimizes the involvement of public money. Resolution is not about bailing-out banks it is about bailing-in shareholders and creditors and using a Resolution Fund based on banking sector contributions. Resolution activity may require the temporary use of public money if the Resolution Fund would not have enough resources, for instance, to capitalize a bridge bank that will be sold later on to the private sector thus recovering the capital involved. In the US this is ensured by the existence of a Treasury credit line that can be drawn upon by the FDIC but that has to be later pais back.This implies then a third element of a complete banking union - the existence of a Financial Backstop that will also be involved in the direct recapitalisation of banks.Finally, the fourth element of the Banking Union is the establishment of a common system of deposit protection. A first step in this direction will be the adoption of the legislative proposal on deposit guarantee schemes, providing a harmonised framework. This framework should ensure depositor confidence and the national deposit guarantee schemes, built on common EU standards, could interact with the SRM. A European deposit guarantee scheme is therefore not essential in the short term. We see the Banking Union as essential to sustain and strengthen the EMU framework primarily because by establishing a European framework for Supervision, it addresses the so-called “financial trilemma”. [1] The trilemma states that financial stability, financial integration and national financial supervision cannot really be made fully compatible. Furthermore, the Banking Union is instrumental to help break the nexus between sovereigns and banks, which was a key feature in the present crisis. The process to build a Banking Union is the more far-reaching reform since the creation of the euro. The Single Supervisory Mechanism is to become operational in 2014. Let me briefly highlight its main features. The SSM will operate as a system, catering for all expertise of national supervisors and at the same time possessing a strong decision-making centre. This will ensure close proximity with the supervised entities and cross-border consistency. Appropriate decentralisation procedures will be defined while preserving the unity of the supervisory system and avoiding duplication.As regards the scope of the banks to fall under the SSM, the proposal is very clear. All banks established in the euro area will fall under the remit of the SSM. This approximates to around 6000 banks. The fact that all banks in participating Member States fall under the scope of the proposal, does not imply that the ECB will conduct direct supervision of all banks. Although the ECB will be ultimately responsible in the conduct of its supervisory function, the ECB will be assisted by national supervisory authorities – the system will be very much decentralised. National supervisors have the knowledge of local and regional markets and have a long-established expertise in supervision. Nevertheless, what ensures that the SSM is really one system are the Regulation dispositions that state that the ECB will issue guidelines and will define the framework for conducting supervision by all systems' components and, most important, that the ECB will have the power to centralise the supervision of any bank or group of banks when it recognises the need to do so. The proposed regulation stipulates the thresholds that will define the significant banks that will fall under more direct ECB supervision. In addition, the ECB may also on its own initiative consider an institution to be of significant relevance and thus decide to exercise direct supervision. Based on a preliminary assessment, the ECB will conduct direct supervision of approximately 150 banks, representing around 80% of the banking sector in Europe. A second important feature of the SSM regards its extensive powers in the conduct of its supervisory function. The SSM, with the ECB at its centre, is entrusted with an extensive set of micro- and macro prudential powers, covering all key tasks relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions. The inclusion of macro-prudential powers is a key element because as shown by the crisis, macro- and micro- risks can actually be mutually reinforcing. A third important feature in the SSM is that national competent authorities of non-euro area Member States have an option to participate in the SSM. Thus the proposal extends to cover all Member States. They can participate through establishing a close cooperation with the ECB. By establishing a close cooperation they need to adhere to the decisions taken by the ECB, if not the cooperation may be suspended or terminated. Separation of monetary and supervisory functions, while benefiting from synergiesAnother of the SSM Regulation I would like to highlight relates to the  principle of separation of the monetary and supervisory functions. The important role given to the Supervisory Board vis-à-vis the Governing Council is one of the various safeguards ensuring a clear separation between the monetary and supervisory function of the ECB. Finally, the concentration of these new functions at the ECB implies a higher level of accountability. The Council proposal also addresses the issue by creating a Review Panel of the SSM decisions from a legal point of view and, in particular, by defining the accountability of the SSM before the European Parliament. One of the main priorities for the ECB during 2013 is ensuring the operationalization of the SSM, so that it can assume its responsibilities effectively and efficiently. Creating a strong centre in a decentralised system such as the SSM, will be crucial to provide the ECB with the necessary means to ensure it will have the resources to effectively fulfil its functions without endangering its reputation. In this context, the articulation of appropriate decentralisation procedures through close cooperation arrangements with national authorities within the unity of the supervisory system will be essential. The knowledge and skills of the system’s human capital will contribute to creating a strong centre. Therefore the recruitment of skilled and experienced staff, particularly banking supervisors, will be a priority. An immediate task of the SSM will be a comprehensive review of the banks that will fall under direct supervision of the ECB. As foreseen in the Regulation, this exercise should include elements of an asset quality review as a basis for a thorough solvency analysis. This review should be instrumental in identifying potential legacy problems.The treatment of legacy assets in the overall Banking Union project is an important issue in connection with European direct recapitalisation of banks. It has to be ensured that in the setting up of a European Resolution Mechanism, the losses of legacy assets, in accordance with good resolution principles, will be borne first by the banks’ shareholders and/or partly by the countries where they are domiciled, so that the use of any European funds do not raise issues of moral hazard and/or unjustified excessive mutualisation of losses coming from the past. As it happens when a private investor takes a stake in the capital of a troubled bank, appropriate due dilligence is conducted and will impact the determination of the price of entry thus diluting previous shareholders.  The SSM in conducting the initial assessment of the banks’ situation will benefit from the fact that the ECB is well prepared to conduct these reviews and related assessments on individual banks, in cooperation with other national and EU authorities and possibly third parties. This is particularly the case for forward-looking analysis of banks’ solvency through the appropriate analytical tools. The ECB, similarly to other national central banks, has over the years strengthened its analytical capacity to support its financial stability function, notably the activity of carrying out systemic risk assessments in real time to support policy discussions.At a larger scale, fundamental work needs to be conducted by the ECB in cooperation with the EBA is the development of a manual of supervisory practices, implementing the process and procedures for conducting supervision in the EU. This should ensure a harmonised approach to the way supervision is conducted and increase comparability across supervisory assessments – e.g. regarding provisioning and risk mitigation policies – under the new EU supervisory framework.The establishment of the SSM requires also the creation of some sort of European Risk Analysis System that will analyse and classify the risk profile of the supervised banks. Work is thereby also needed on harmonising current national supervisory rating systems and on the use of early warning indicators of bank distress. The ECB is also investing on its analytical capabilities in this front.Let me conclude. The agreement reached on the SSM by the Council shows the resolve to reinforce the EMU by strengthening the institutional financial framework. The momentum needs to be kept. The SSM is a key component, but it is only one component of the Banking Union. In particular, a European framework for resolution of banks – with a Single Resolution Mechanism centred on a Single Resolution Authority needs to follow.Throughout 2013 the ECB will prepare itself for its new supervisory function. I am confident that in cooperation with national supervisory authorities we will achieve the goal of establishing an effective and robust SSM.Thank you.[1]D. Schoenmaker, (2011), “The Financial Trilemma”, Economic Letters, No. 111.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur today crisi made clear high interconnect integr area euro area genuin econom monetari union need stronger institut framework import element strengthen financi institut framework creation bank union singl supervisori mechan ssm repres first pillar intervent today touch upon differ element bank union under rational establish subsequ review main featur ssm mention immedi challeng ecb prepar assum supervisori task bank union aim build integr financi framework safeguard financi stabil minimis cost bank failur consist four complementari build block ssm form integr part establish european framework supervis form first pillar bank union impli name ssm mechan compos nation compet author ecb possibl noneuro area member state particip process establish ssm underway council propos form basi current trialogu european parliament quit pleas council propos lay robust legal framework ssm oper order ensur time implement essenc propos enact soon possibl import element support effect ssm complet singl rulebook whose implement overseen eba complet singl rulebook signific contribut singl market toward creat level play field harmonis regul european union level likewis ssm also contribut goal second element bank union establish singl resolut mechan framework singl resolut mechan still defin look forward commiss upcom legisl propos let nevertheless highlight main featur view mechan singl resolut mechan would singl resolut author centr would govern resolut name signific bank coordin applic resolut tool reflect organis setup similar ssm comprehens set enforc tool power author resolv bank ssm order singl resolut mechan perceiv credibl suffici fund let clear talk bailingout bank public money resolut order resolv situat bank attain point nonviabl way minim involv public money resolut bailingout bank bailingin sharehold creditor use resolut fund base bank sector contribut resolut activ may requir temporari use public money resolut fund would enough resourc instanc capit bridg bank sold later privat sector thus recov capit involv us ensur exist treasuri credit line drawn upon fdic later pai back impli third element complet bank union exist financi backstop also involv direct recapitalis bank final fourth element bank union establish common system deposit protect first step direct adopt legisl propos deposit guarante scheme provid harmonis framework framework ensur depositor confid nation deposit guarante scheme built common eu standard could interact srm european deposit guarante scheme therefor essenti short term see bank union essenti sustain strengthen emu framework primarili establish european framework supervis address socal financi trilemma trilemma state financi stabil financi integr nation financi supervis cannot realli made fulli compat furthermor bank union instrument help break nexus sovereign bank key featur present crisi process build bank union farreach reform sinc creation euro singl supervisori mechan becom oper let briefli highlight main featur ssm oper system cater expertis nation supervisor time possess strong decisionmak centr ensur close proxim supervis entiti crossbord consist appropri decentralis procedur defin preserv uniti supervisori system avoid duplic regard scope bank fall ssm propos clear bank establish euro area fall remit ssm approxim around bank fact bank particip member state fall scope propos impli ecb conduct direct supervis bank although ecb ultim respons conduct supervisori function ecb assist nation supervisori author system much decentralis nation supervisor knowledg local region market longestablish expertis supervis nevertheless ensur ssm realli one system regul disposit state ecb issu guidelin defin framework conduct supervis system compon import ecb power centralis supervis bank group bank recognis need propos regul stipul threshold defin signific bank fall direct ecb supervis addit ecb may also initi consid institut signific relev thus decid exercis direct supervis base preliminari assess ecb conduct direct supervis approxim bank repres around bank sector europ second import featur ssm regard extens power conduct supervisori function ssm ecb centr entrust extens set micro macro prudenti power cover key task relat prudenti supervis credit institut inclus macroprudenti power key element shown crisi macro micro risk actual mutual reinforc third import featur ssm nation compet author noneuro area member state option particip ssm thus propos extend cover member state particip establish close cooper ecb establish close cooper need adher decis taken ecb cooper may suspend termin separ monetari supervisori function benefit synergiesanoth ssm regul would like highlight relat principl separ monetari supervisori function import role given supervisori board visàvi govern council one various safeguard ensur clear separ monetari supervisori function ecb final concentr new function ecb impli higher level account council propos also address issu creat review panel ssm decis legal point view particular defin account ssm european parliament one main prioriti ecb ensur operation ssm assum respons effect effici creat strong centr decentralis system ssm crucial provid ecb necessari mean ensur resourc effect fulfil function without endang reput context articul appropri decentralis procedur close cooper arrang nation author within uniti supervisori system essenti knowledg skill system human capit contribut creat strong centr therefor recruit skill experienc staff particular bank supervisor prioriti immedi task ssm comprehens review bank fall direct supervis ecb foreseen regul exercis includ element asset qualiti review basi thorough solvenc analysi review instrument identifi potenti legaci problem treatment legaci asset overal bank union project import issu connect european direct recapitalis bank ensur set european resolut mechan loss legaci asset accord good resolut principl born first bank sharehold andor part countri domicil use european fund rais issu moral hazard andor unjustifi excess mutualis loss come past happen privat investor take stake capit troubl bank appropri due dillig conduct impact determin price entri thus dilut previous sharehold ssm conduct initi assess bank situat benefit fact ecb well prepar conduct review relat assess individu bank cooper nation eu author possibl third parti particular case forwardlook analysi bank solvenc appropri analyt tool ecb similar nation central bank year strengthen analyt capac support financi stabil function notabl activ carri system risk assess real time support polici discuss larger scale fundament work need conduct ecb cooper eba develop manual supervisori practic implement process procedur conduct supervis eu ensur harmonis approach way supervis conduct increas compar across supervisori assess e g regard provis risk mitig polici new eu supervisori framework establish ssm requir also creation sort european risk analysi system analys classifi risk profil supervis bank work therebi also need harmonis current nation supervisori rate system use earli warn indic bank distress ecb also invest analyt capabl front let conclud agreement reach ssm council show resolv reinforc emu strengthen institut financi framework momentum need kept ssm key compon one compon bank union particular european framework resolut bank singl resolut mechan centr singl resolut author need follow throughout ecb prepar new supervisori function confid cooper nation supervisori author achiev goal establish effect robust ssm thank d schoenmak financi trilemma econom letter reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en