Jürgen Stark: In the aftermath of the global economic crisis: What next?,18-05-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,1583,"<p>It is a pleasure to be here today. In my introductory remarks I would like to discuss briefly the main underlying causes for the current problems of some euro area countries. Such an understanding of the causes is essential in order to develop strategies for “Restoring Confidence in the European Economy”, the main topic of this session of the conference. In the remainder of my initial remarks I will then outline the key policy elements of such a strategy, both at the national and at the European level. The majority of EMU member states is about to overcome the economic consequences of the global financial crisis. The economic recovery in the euro area has been sustained and has become more broadly based. The economy no longer needs the degree of economic or monetary stimulus as adopted during the height of the crisis in late 2008 and early 2009. Economic growth in the first quarter of 2011 has turned out significantly stronger than expected. Germany, in particular, is experiencing high growth rates, falling unemployment and a declining government deficit. To a great extent these positive developments are attributable to economic reforms adopted in the past which are now taking effect. Some countries, at the euro area’s periphery, Greece, Ireland and Portugal, find themselves in a critical economic situation. The current problems in these countries have a number of root causes which have led to significant macroeconomic imbalances and vulnerabilities. In the years prior to the recent crisis, price and costs developments diverged noticeably within the euro area over extended periods of time. The cumulative impact of those differences has meant the gradual but significant erosion of the competitiveness positions in a number of euro area countries. The mechanisms underlying these developments have varied between countries but mostly have been linked with strong growth in domestic demand, relative to the supply capacity of the economy. Demand pressures were often related to overly optimistic expectations about future incomes and profits. That triggered high spending, reduced saving and excessive indebtedness by the private sector and often increased risk-taking by the financial sector. This process was often exacerbated by low real interest rates and an insufficiently tight fiscal stance. Even where headline fiscal numbers such as the deficit or the debt ratio still suggested a healthy fiscal situation, the underlying reality was that government finances were often buoyed artificially by cyclically sensitive revenues. With the deterioration of the economic situation the structural weaknesses in the underlying fiscal position became evident culminating in the current sovereign debt crisis in some euro area countries. These developments highlight important shortcomings not only at the level of national policy-making but also with respect to the institutional framework at the European level. The Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) was watered down in 2005 and has been ineffective in preventing the build-up of significant fiscal imbalances. Peer pressure has not worked and the changes in the fiscal rules in 2005 have led to excessive political interference and the lack of effective implementation. Moreover, the institutional framework so far lacks any effective tools for macroeconomic surveillance which could prevent the emergence of macroeconomic imbalances. The Broad Economic Policy Guidelines have proven not to be an effective tool. Before turning to the necessary policy responses I would like to stress that the fiscal and macroeconomic policy challenges are not problems which some euro area countries face in isolation but are also evident in many other advanced economies outside the euro area. Government deficit and debt levels have reached historically high levels. Concerns about the soundness of fiscal policies are a broader phenomenon, as, for example, discussed in IMF research and highlighted by the recent lowering of the outlook for the U.S. sovereign debt rating. Also issues of competitiveness and external imbalances are global in nature and not specific to the euro area. But this is not an excuse for the Europeans not to bring their house in order.A number of policy implications for the euro area follow from this analysis. The main objective has to be a smooth functioning of EMU which implies that countries follow a path of sustainable and balanced growth. The strategy to achieve this consists of two key elements: first, to unwind the imbalances that had arisen during the first decade of EMU; and second, to ensure an adequate institutional framework and sufficient structural flexibility of individual Member States so that the risk of such imbalances occurring again is minimised.The first challenge is to restore price and cost competitiveness. In a monetary union such as the euro area, with a single currency and a single monetary policy, the main adjustment mechanism is the competitiveness channel which works via an adjustment in relative prices and costs. Over the next few years, the restoration of competitiveness will require significant further adjustments in a number of countries which have seen an erosion of competitiveness. The second key challenge at the current juncture is that governments need to return to sustainable fiscal positions. Even in the short-term fiscal consolidation will help to regain confidence and thus have a positive impact on economic activity. This should be underpinned by structural reforms to enhance the growth potential. For some countries returning to sustainable fiscal positions requires significant further fiscal consolidation efforts, especially in countries with large external deficits and high levels of indebtedness. But this call for fiscal discipline applies more widely – in all countries the implementation of strong fiscal consolidation efforts is required and effective rules need to be adopted that anchor fiscal prudence in overall budgetary decisions in the future. Third, both competitiveness and fiscal sustainability should be supported by higher productivity growth. That implies that structural reforms should be targeted to remove remaining rigidities in the labour and product markets. In recent years, the progress with respect to structural reforms in euro area countries has overall clearly been disappointing and not commensurate with the requirements of participating in a common currency area. The Europe 2020 Strategy for jobs and smart, sustainable and inclusive growth may provide the institutional framework at the European level for ambitious progress with respect to structural reforms. These policy requirements gain particular urgency for those countries currently receiving EU/IMF financial assistance. The policy conditionality associated with these programmes has been designed to address the main imbalances and vulnerabilities, taking into account the specificities of the individual countries. Full compliance with the policy conditionality of the assistance programmes is absolutely essential to unwind existing imbalances and restore market confidence.Turning to the necessary policy response at the European level, the reinforcement of the fiscal rules and the introduction of a new surveillance framework for macroeconomic imbalances are necessary elements in strengthening overall economic governance in the euro area. The current proposals are a step in the right direction but so far fail to constitute the necessary quantum leap for euro area countries. As to macroeconomic surveillance, it is of paramount importance that the procedure has a clear focus on those countries which pose the most serious threat to the smooth functioning of EMU. These are – as the present experience shows – countries with large and persistent current account deficits, significant accumulated losses of competitiveness and high levels of private and public sector indebtedness. Moreover, the procedures should be quasi-automatic, limiting excessive political interference in the process. Furthermore, it would be useful to have a more gradual application of financial sanctions to provide clear incentives for appropriate macroeconomic policies. Policy-makers in individual euro area countries have to come to terms with the realities of being part of a monetary union and adjust policies accordingly. This means pursuing sound and sustainable fiscal policies, preventing the build-up of macroeconomic imbalances and ensuring that the economy has the necessary shock-absorption capacity – and in particular flexibility – to ensure a smooth adjustment to country-specific developments. In that respect, ambitious and front-loaded structural reforms are essential. The EU 2020 Strategy can play a useful role in that respect. Of course, the ultimate responsibility for effective reform lies with national governments who have to ensure the economic flexibility and growth potential necessary to reap the full benefits of being a member of the euro area. Some loss of sovereignty is part of the reality of sharing and benefiting from a common currency. If this is not acknowledged in time, it may imply an even larger loss of sovereignty at a later stage. The ECB considers it fundamental to set up an effective surveillance mechanism in the euro area in order to prevent challenges similar to those experienced currently by some euro area countries from re-emerging in the future. It is equally important that markets can play their disciplinary role in an efficient manner. This requires transparency in the surveillance process and the realisation of markets that the no-bail out clause does indeed constitute one of the binding constraints of EMU.As in the past, the ECB will continue to deliver on its mandate and ensure price stability for the euro area over the medium term. This will provide an important anchor of stability to each individual euro area country, an anchor which is particularly valuable for those countries undergoing a difficult adjustment process. Individual Member States will benefit from this stability. At the same time, they have the responsibility to ensure the smooth functioning of the common currency area. This requires further efforts in all euro area countries to make sure that, in terms of monetary policy, one size does indeed fit all. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",pleasur today introductori remark would like discuss briefli main under caus current problem euro area countri understand caus essenti order develop strategi restor confid european economi main topic session confer remaind initi remark outlin key polici element strategi nation european level major emu member state overcom econom consequ global financi crisi econom recoveri euro area sustain becom broad base economi longer need degre econom monetari stimulus adopt height crisi late earli econom growth first quarter turn signific stronger expect germani particular experienc high growth rate fall unemploy declin govern deficit great extent posit develop attribut econom reform adopt past take effect countri euro area peripheri greec ireland portug find critic econom situat current problem countri number root caus led signific macroeconom imbal vulner year prior recent crisi price cost develop diverg notic within euro area extend period time cumul impact differ meant gradual signific eros competit posit number euro area countri mechan under develop vari countri most link strong growth domest demand relat suppli capac economi demand pressur often relat over optimist expect futur incom profit trigger high spend reduc save excess indebted privat sector often increas risktak financi sector process often exacerb low real interest rate insuffici tight fiscal stanc even headlin fiscal number deficit debt ratio still suggest healthi fiscal situat under realiti govern financ often buoy artifici cyclic sensit revenu deterior econom situat structur weak under fiscal posit becam evid culmin current sovereign debt crisi euro area countri develop highlight import shortcom level nation policymak also respect institut framework european level stabil growth pact sgp water ineffect prevent buildup signific fiscal imbal peer pressur work chang fiscal rule led excess polit interfer lack effect implement moreov institut framework far lack effect tool macroeconom surveil could prevent emerg macroeconom imbal broad econom polici guidelin proven effect tool turn necessari polici respons would like stress fiscal macroeconom polici challeng problem euro area countri face isol also evid mani advanc economi outsid euro area govern deficit debt level reach histor high level concern sound fiscal polici broader phenomenon exampl discuss imf research highlight recent lower outlook u sovereign debt rate also issu competit extern imbal global natur specif euro area excus european bring hous order number polici implic euro area follow analysi main object smooth function emu impli countri follow path sustain balanc growth strategi achiev consist two key element first unwind imbal arisen first decad emu second ensur adequ institut framework suffici structur flexibl individu member state risk imbal occur minimis first challeng restor price cost competit monetari union euro area singl currenc singl monetari polici main adjust mechan competit channel work via adjust relat price cost next year restor competit requir signific adjust number countri seen eros competit second key challeng current junctur govern need return sustain fiscal posit even shortterm fiscal consolid help regain confid thus posit impact econom activ underpin structur reform enhanc growth potenti countri return sustain fiscal posit requir signific fiscal consolid effort especi countri larg extern deficit high level indebted call fiscal disciplin appli wide countri implement strong fiscal consolid effort requir effect rule need adopt anchor fiscal prudenc overal budgetari decis futur third competit fiscal sustain support higher product growth impli structur reform target remov remain rigid labour product market recent year progress respect structur reform euro area countri overal clear disappoint commensur requir particip common currenc area europ strategi job smart sustain inclus growth may provid institut framework european level ambiti progress respect structur reform polici requir gain particular urgenc countri current receiv euimf financi assist polici condit associ programm design address main imbal vulner take account specif individu countri full complianc polici condit assist programm absolut essenti unwind exist imbal restor market confid turn necessari polici respons european level reinforc fiscal rule introduct new surveil framework macroeconom imbal necessari element strengthen overal econom govern euro area current propos step right direct far fail constitut necessari quantum leap euro area countri macroeconom surveil paramount import procedur clear focus countri pose serious threat smooth function emu present experi show countri larg persist current account deficit signific accumul loss competit high level privat public sector indebted moreov procedur quasiautomat limit excess polit interfer process furthermor would use gradual applic financi sanction provid clear incent appropri macroeconom polici policymak individu euro area countri come term realiti part monetari union adjust polici accord mean pursu sound sustain fiscal polici prevent buildup macroeconom imbal ensur economi necessari shockabsorpt capac particular flexibl ensur smooth adjust countryspecif develop respect ambiti frontload structur reform essenti eu strategi play use role respect cours ultim respons effect reform lie nation govern ensur econom flexibl growth potenti necessari reap full benefit member euro area loss sovereignti part realiti share benefit common currenc acknowledg time may impli even larger loss sovereignti later stage ecb consid fundament set effect surveil mechan euro area order prevent challeng similar experienc current euro area countri reemerg futur equal import market play disciplinari role effici manner requir transpar surveil process realis market nobail claus inde constitut one bind constraint emu past ecb continu deliv mandat ensur price stabil euro area medium term provid import anchor stabil individu euro area countri anchor particular valuabl countri undergo difficult adjust process individu member state benefit stabil time respons ensur smooth function common currenc area requir effort euro area countri make sure term monetari polici one size inde fit reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en