Yves Mersch: Towards a European Banking Union,30-09-2013,European Central Bank,ECB,3574,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues and friends, It’s a pleasure for me to be back at the Bridge Forum Dialogue that we established in 2000. 13 years later, the original goal to bring together EU institutions established in Luxembourg and the actors and institutions of Luxembourg financial, economic and legal life with an EU outlook and to foster constructive dialogues across countries is more relevant than ever.My speech today is about the advancement towards a banking union in Europe. This step is essential to unravel the legacy of the financial crisis and will also be a cornerstone of a new Europe. It goes beyond re-establishing the indispensable financial health of banks and securing the robustness of the banking system. No other economic activity touches upon so many aspects of our lives as banking does. Banks must again become the dynamic engines of modern economies. But they must shed past excesses to fit in a new world with new regulations, new instruments and new institutions.Yet, in recent years, banks have been under tremendous stress. Those at greatest risk have caused much pain, public outrage and destruction of wealth. But, most banks did not engage in directly hazardous activities. Neither did the majority of bankers receive sky-high bonuses. Still, over the last two decades the global banking system has grown increasingly vulnerable. Most banks were undercapitalised, had fragile funding structures and – in hindsight – many engaged in unsound lending practices. Several banks, primarily based in the US, thrived on complex structured investments, whose risks were not truly understood. Rating agencies underplayed the potential risks. Furthermore, a small number of banks plunged into dubious acquisitions. During this period, regulators and supervisors around the world did not keep pace with the complexity of financial innovation. Neither did they recognise the riskiness embedded in ever larger volumes of derivative instruments. Moral hazard, adverse incentives and – in some cases – sheer greed and anti-social behaviour resulted. Michael Sandel in his book “The moral limits of markets” asks: “Why worry that we are moving towards a society in which everything is up for sale?” and the answer is “For two reasons: one is about inequality, the other about corruption.”When systemic risks materialised in 2007- 2008, the world was struck by a sudden systemic financial crisis: unprecedented when measured by financial losses and fiscal costs; unprecedented when measured by its geographical reach; and also unprecedented when measured by the collapse in worldwide trade, economic output and financial activity. We were on the brink of a global financial meltdown. The ensuing “Great Recession” hit the euro area hard due to its high economic openness and financial exposures to a bank financed system. [1] It triggered the euro area’s sovereign debt crisis, for which several distinct root causes were to blame. As Tony Judt put it, we saw: “Uncertainty elevated to paroxysms of collective fear – which had corroded the confidence and institutions of liberalism.” Today I have two messages. The first is that banks mirror their environment, but also contribute to shaping it in many respects. Over long periods of time the soundness and credit standing of banks depends on good governance, shrewd planning, and their spirit of initiative. But, it also hinges on the dynamism of the economy, the sustainability of public and private finances, and the coherence of EMU’s architecture and political economy. Sound banking regulation and supervision are also key: prevention must be the first line of defence. However, if adverse shocks hit or bank failures arise, there needs to be an effective crisis-management and resolution framework with credible backstops. Several of these elements were either weak or altogether missing in Europe and in Member States with a strong banking presence. At the same time, monetary union needs banking union because sound banks are an essential complement to sound money. Banks are the main transmission channel of monetary policy to the real economy.The second message is that there were important similarities between banking developments and the evolution of the crisis across the Atlantic. But there were also relevant differences. The crisis is now practically over in the US and other parts of the world, whereas it is only slowly tapering off in the euro area. To understand how a European Banking Union can succeed we need to understand how we are now addressing all root causes of the sovereign debt crisis across countries and completing EMU’s architecture. [2] I will now address the following two questions, while offering some reflections along the way: What is being done to fix the root causes of the crisis? How do we shore up banks and what will the European Banking Union achieve? An important lesson from the sovereign debt crisis is that the “uniqueness of EMU” embeds systemic risks. It’s not possible to partake in a strong single market and a strong single currency vis-à-vis weakly coordinated national fiscal policies, economic policies and financial arrangements. For example, at present, the single monetary policy is still transmitted in a regime of national banking regulation, supervision and resolution settlement. Another lesson is that we need to secure consistency between the various institutions, rules and instruments which now shape our political economy. Thus, while the crisis was still unfolding, policy-makers started to redesign the euro area. The most visible elements are a crisis management and resolution framework. There are five adjustment programmes for Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain and Cyprus. They are jointly supported financially by the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and the permanent European Stability Mechanism (ESM), plus the IMF. Such risk-sharing in turn requires a strengthening of the governance framework to counter the moral hazard inherent in such an insurance scheme. And this is precisely what we have seen over the last three years. There is a new governance to restore fiscal sustainability and prevent or correct macroeconomic imbalances. The Stability and Growth Pact has been tightened up by the so-called “six-pack” of economic governance measures, including the Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure. They, in turn, have been complemented by the “two-pack”. Programme countries are undertaking painful domestic adjustment programmes which show first signs of getting them back on a sustainable track.Something new emerged at the June 2012 Summit of euro area leaders: glimpses of a  shared European vision for a coherent and viable architecture of EMU. The Presidents of the European Council (Herman Van Rompuy), the Eurogroup (then Jean-Claude Juncker), the European Commission (José Manuel Barroso) and the ECB (Mario Draghi) drew up what is known as the “Four Presidents’ Report”. [3] The report backs a new architecture for European Economic and Monetary Union by creating four unions over the next decade: a banking union, comprising an integrated financial framework, including the Single Supervisory Mechanism or SSM and a bank resolution framework; a fiscal union, comprising an integrated budgetary framework that will go beyond the fiscal compact; an economic union, comprising an integrated economic policy framework; and a political union, enhancing the democratic legitimacy and accountability of all decision-making bodies within the EU. These “four unions” are envisaged to mesh and engage with each other, like cogwheels in a mechanical apparatus. Think of a finely crafted automatic watch: the spin of one wheel sets the others in motion. Conversely, when the momentum of one decreases, that of the others follows suit. The banking union, the fiscal union, the economic union and the political union can transmit and reinforce the dynamics of European integration.Last year’s announcement concerning Outright Monetary Transactions reassured markets. Confidence is slowly returning. Recent data show that growth and - following with a lag - job prospects are slowly improving. Imbalances are gradually receding, while deleveraging and recapitalisation have started. European countries can turn themselves around. Yet, while risks of extreme outcomes have receded, the situation is still very fragile. We must exploit this room for manoeuvre. Hopefully, Jean Monnet was right when he noted that “Europe will be forged in crises, and will be the sum of the solutions adopted for those crises”. Looking ahead, how can we secure a level playing field for the banking system across Europe, reduce the risks of financial crises, reduce their impacts if they occur, and ensure that banks contribute to financial stability and prosperity? I will split this question into three parts. We have seen that there were relatively similar global failings in banking governance, risk management and capital adequacy. Basel III is the basis for global banking reform efforts to increase the resilience of the banking system, recover market confidence and provide a level playing field for the industry. Basel III will provide the opportunity to ensure a harmonised set of prudential rules for all credit institutions across every country. In the EU, Basel III is transposed through two pieces of legislation, namely the Capital Requirements Directive and the Capital Requirements Regulation. Negotiations on these items of legislation, which will enter into force in January 2014, were very intense. We welcome the availability of uniform rules and standards but will have to make sure that they are also implemented in a common way. Thus we need to overcome all the waivers, exceptions as well as grandfathering claims and options. Andrea Enria, the Chair of the EBA with whom I shared a panel at a conference in Frankfurt last week, mentioned that more than 100 of such “flexibilities” still exist even in the new framework.The crisis has shown that an economic and monetary union cannot function without a banking union. We are now building one, from the ground up, to tackle the “doom loop”, curb financial fragmentation and enable banks to rebuild trust and provide a sustainable supply of credit to the real economy in every country and for every sector. [4]The regulation for establishing a single supervisory mechanism (or SSM) has recently been approved by the European Parliament. It is in the process of being finally agreed by the European Council. The ECB will be the central authority of the SSM and it will be supported by national supervisory authorities. Its mandate will be to supervise the whole banking sector of the euro area, plus those of any non-euro area Member State wishing to join. The ECB will be entrusted with the whole toolbox for banking supervision including: authorising and withdrawing bank licences, collecting on and off-site information, undertaking on-site inspections in cooperation with the national supervisors, and validating banks internal models and risk controls. Whenever necessary, the ECB will also be able to solicit additional capital, liquidity and other prudential requirements. This is a huge set of responsibilities for which the SSM will draw extensively upon the expertise of national supervisors. The basis for SSM activity will be, as for any other supervisor in the EU, the Single Rulebook. But this is at a very high level. Embedded will be the ECB Supervisory Manual to install a single supervisory approach with sufficient granularity to overcome a fragmented regulation. At the moment it appears that the ECB will directly supervise approximately 130 banks that are found to be “significant” according to the criteria laid down in the SSM Regulation. [5] This is less than 5% of all active euro area banks which are our counterparts in monetary operations. Nevertheless, these cover around 85% of the total banking assets.  What about all the other banks? Would it be realistic – or even desirable – for the ECB to supervise 6,000 additional credit institutions? Given also the wealth of expertise at the national level, and the advantages stemming from proximity in supervision, the answer is clearly “No”. An efficient decentralisation of supervisory activities within the SSM will bring about effective decision-making. But does a “two-tier system” imply different treatment? No. The difference between the two groups of banks will concern only the degree of centralisation of supervisory action within the SSM. The “singleness of the SSM” is ensured by applying the same common supervisory approach to all banks: First, the Supervisory Manual will be binding for all Banks under SSM supervision, although some alleviated reporting might be envisageable for less significant institutions.Second, the national supervisory authorities will have to comply with ECB regulations, guidelines or general instructions;Third, the ECB will have access to all data of all banks; andFinally, the ECB, can decide to exercise supervisory powers directly. We are facing a huge logistical challenge. There is a vast amount of preparatory work which has to be ready 12 months after the regulation enters into force, including: selecting highly skilled staff; drawing up the final list of significant banks to be directly supervised by the ECB; harmonising supervisory approaches and reporting requirements; mapping the euro area banking system; developing a supervisory manual and publishing a framework regulation within six months after public consultation. These tasks are already completed by around ninety per cent. The next big challenge is the design and undertaking of the asset quality review (AQR). The comprehensive balance sheet assessment is essential for ensuring that the SSM gets off to a good start and avoids reputational damage stemming from the possible emergence of problem banks in the early days of operation. It is like a due diligence before the actual start of the banking union. It consists of a risk assessment which will be the basis of AQR, and the AQR will flow into a stress test to be jointly taken with EBA. All three elements must be completed before the SSM becomes operational. Together they will allow a comprehensive view of banks’ balance sheets, bringing together quantitative and qualitative aspects of banks’ outstanding risk.  Which risks? Risks already present, or ones that may emerge over time. The AQR should therefore be a rather static, point-in-time exercise according to rigorous standards on all aspects of asset quality and with an emphasis on the level of provisions. More forward looking assessments could then be provided in the baseline scenario of the stress test. For us, this is an exercise on an unprecedented scale, and we will also call on external experts to enhance its credibility. The SSM Regulation provides a clear separation between monetary policy and supervisory tasks, the latter entrusted to the newly established Supervisory Board. This organisational separation is necessary to comply the increased accountability requirements of the supervisory function and still respect the independence of the monetary policy function.The Governing Council’s deliberations on supervisory matters will be strictly separated, including separate agendas and meetings. The SSM will also have its own accountability framework vis-à-vis the European Parliament, the Eurogroup and national parliaments. It will apply to the Chair of the SSM’s Supervisory Board of the SSM, and not to the ECB’s President. This is intended to avoid any confusion among the two sets of tasks, also in the public perception, and further protects the ECB’s independence. Last, over and beyond such clear separation of mandates, decision-making processes, rules and instruments between the two functions of the ECB - there need to be an exchange of information to reap synergies. Having for example the financial stability function and thus macro-prudential tasks under the roof of the central bank is of course nothing new. Different from the micro-prudential perspective it is there mostly docked at the National Central Banks. It therefore makes sense, to have different institutional arrangements for macro-prudential decision-making within the SSM than those that are foreseen for micro-prudential. In the latter case there is a need for a clear separation of functions between the ECB as monetary policy-maker and supervisor. For banking supervision to be effective, a Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) is also indispensable to resolve non-viable banks. Without an SRM, we might face a misalignment of incentives between the supervisory and the resolution functions. Moreover, the supervisor’s judgments must also be enforceable. The Commission recently proposed setting up a single resolution authority backed by a single bank resolution fund. The authority and the fund must be separate from the SSM, independent and supranational. Jointly, they constitute a single resolution system with the ability to intervene directly in banks losses, dividing them among shareholders and creditors. Please note that if we are not going to have a joint SRM, beware that presently not all countries have a national resolution authority and fund: those ones have to set one up very rapidly. In fact, supervisors could face a dilemma. On the one hand, there may be a danger of contagion and financial market panic. On the other, supporting insolvent banks with central bank liquidity might give rise to “zombies” and weaken the credibility of banking supervision and resolution, and thus the banking union as a whole. Therefore, I strongly support the timeline envisaged for the SRM to start functioning on 1 January 2015. An important prerequisite for the SRM is the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive. The Directive still has to be agreed with the European Parliament. In my view we should push for a start date of 2015 for bail-in so that we have the full resolution toolbox available from the outset – instead of over-extending the State Aid rules as a proxy.In the future, the burden of a bank’s failure will be shifted away from the public. How? Shareholders and creditors will be first to bear the resolution costs. Only if this is insufficient should the banking industry as a whole step in via resolution funds – making the fiscal backstop the very last resort. To ensure adequate loss-absorbing capacity, each bank has to fulfil a minimum requirement of own funds and eligible liabilities for bail-in. The banking union is not an end by itself. Is it instrumental? Yes. And why? Because in the euro area about 80% of the financing of the real economy originates from the banking sector. Genuine banking integration is important in many respects. Why? Because a more integrated banking market intensifies competition by changing the focal point of the strategies of banks and other financial market participants. More competition means that existing capital is allocated more efficiently. This promotes access to new funding opportunities for companies, encouraging investment and thus contributing to growth. Small and medium-sized enterprises with no direct access to capital markets may benefit most. For the ECB, an integrated banking space eases monetary policy transmission and the effectiveness of monetary policy. A successful European banking union will also relieve the ECB of some of the tasks undertaken during the crisis and the need for non-standard measures. Moreover, financial market integration helps smooth the effects of asymmetric shocks through income insurance when a country’s residents hold claims to dividends, interests and rental revenue from other countries. In the US, such risk sharing has been shown to be far more important than federal budget transfers. Talking about flaws in EMU’s design is a bit reductive. It certainly doesn’t capture the depth of the “repair work” going on in Europe and the euro area in particular. We are in fact adding new foundations to a framework that has brought us as far as it could, and that couldn’t cope with a systemic crisis: it actually aggravated it. Now, we need determination in completing the constitutional framework envisaged under the “four unions”, the four cogwheels that must work together in a synchronised manner and in one direction. There must be no complacency: no “wait and see what happens next”. In recent years, a significant part of the banking system in several countries has been kept alive by public capital injections and state guarantees, plus the liquidity support of the ECB. Most banks were no longer masters of their destiny. In hindsight, many of them generated instability and became part of the problem. Now, we need them to be active parts of the solution. Hence the call for a European banking union: the biggest cogwheel that we can complete right now. I hope that you agree that we have come a long way since the start of the crisis. But we still have further to go! Implementing the banking union will take a great deal of hard work and cooperation. However, once it’s in place we shall have a healthier financial system. To conclude, let me quote Alexis de Tocqueville here: “I cannot help fearing that men may reach a point where they look on every new theory as a danger, every innovation as a toilsome trouble, every social advance as a first step toward revolution, and that they may absolutely refuse to move at all.” Thank you for your attention.[1]See also: Shambaugh, J.C. (2012), “The Euro’s Three Crises”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring. And Schoenmaker, D. (2011), “The financial trilemma”, Economic Letters, 111 (2011), pp. 57-59.[2]See also Mongelli (2013) “The mutating euro area crisis: is the balance between “sceptics” and “advocates” shifting?”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 144, at http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpops/ecbocp144.pdf[3]“Four Presidents” of the European Council, European Commission, Eurogroup and the ECB. European Council (2012), “Towards a Genuine Economic and Monetary Union”, June http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/131201.pdf[4]See Mersch, Y. (2013), “A regime change in supervision and resolution“, Speech at European Supervisor Education (ESE) Conference, Frankfurt, 26 September 2013[5]The methodology was devised by the ECB. Included are at least (i) those banks having a total value of assets of more than €30 billion, (ii) those banks representing more than 20% of domestic GDP (unless less than €5 billion in assets), (iii) the three most significant banks in each country and (iv) those banks receiving direct assistance from the EFSF/ESM. Furthermore, the ECB can, at any time, decide to exercise direct supervision of any other bank if considered necessary.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen dear colleagu friend pleasur back bridg forum dialogu establish year later origin goal bring togeth eu institut establish luxembourg actor institut luxembourg financi econom legal life eu outlook foster construct dialogu across countri relev ever speech today advanc toward bank union europ step essenti unravel legaci financi crisi also cornerston new europ goe beyond reestablish indispens financi health bank secur robust bank system econom activ touch upon mani aspect live bank bank must becom dynam engin modern economi must shed past excess fit new world new regul new instrument new institut yet recent year bank tremend stress greatest risk caus much pain public outrag destruct wealth bank engag direct hazard activ neither major banker receiv skyhigh bonus still last two decad global bank system grown increas vulner bank undercapitalis fragil fund structur hindsight mani engag unsound lend practic sever bank primarili base us thrive complex structur invest whose risk truli understood rate agenc underplay potenti risk furthermor small number bank plung dubious acquisit period regul supervisor around world keep pace complex financi innov neither recognis riski embed ever larger volum deriv instrument moral hazard advers incent case sheer greed antisoci behaviour result sandel book moral limit market ask worri move toward societi everyth sale answer two reason one inequ corrupt system risk materialis world struck sudden system financi crisi unpreced measur financi loss fiscal cost unpreced measur geograph reach also unpreced measur collaps worldwid trade econom output financi activ brink global financi meltdown ensu great recess hit euro area hard due high econom open financi exposur bank financ system trigger euro area sovereign debt crisi sever distinct root caus blame toni judt put saw uncertainti elev paroxysm collect fear corrod confid institut liber today two messag first bank mirror environ also contribut shape mani respect long period time sound credit stand bank depend good govern shrewd plan spirit initi also hing dynam economi sustain public privat financ coher emu architectur polit economi sound bank regul supervis also key prevent must first line defenc howev advers shock hit bank failur aris need effect crisismanag resolut framework credibl backstop sever element either weak altogeth miss europ member state strong bank presenc time monetari union need bank union sound bank essenti complement sound money bank main transmiss channel monetari polici real economi second messag import similar bank develop evolut crisi across atlant also relev differ crisi practic us part world wherea slowli taper euro area understand european bank union succeed need understand address root caus sovereign debt crisi across countri complet emu architectur address follow two question offer reflect along way done fix root caus crisi shore bank european bank union achiev import lesson sovereign debt crisi uniqu emu emb system risk possibl partak strong singl market strong singl currenc visàvi weak coordin nation fiscal polici econom polici financi arrang exampl present singl monetari polici still transmit regim nation bank regul supervis resolut settlement anoth lesson need secur consist various institut rule instrument shape polit economi thus crisi still unfold policymak start redesign euro area visibl element crisi manag resolut framework five adjust programm greec ireland portug spain cyprus joint support financi european financi stabil facil efsf perman european stabil mechan esm plus imf riskshar turn requir strengthen govern framework counter moral hazard inher insur scheme precis seen last three year new govern restor fiscal sustain prevent correct macroeconom imbal stabil growth pact tighten socal sixpack econom govern measur includ macroeconom imbal procedur turn complement twopack programm countri undertak pain domest adjust programm show first sign get back sustain track someth new emerg june summit euro area leader glimps share european vision coher viabl architectur emu presid european council herman van rompuy eurogroup jeanclaud juncker european commiss josé manuel barroso ecb mario draghi drew known four presid report report back new architectur european econom monetari union creat four union next decad bank union compris integr financi framework includ singl supervisori mechan ssm bank resolut framework fiscal union compris integr budgetari framework go beyond fiscal compact econom union compris integr econom polici framework polit union enhanc democrat legitimaci account decisionmak bodi within eu four union envisag mesh engag like cogwheel mechan apparatus think fine craft automat watch spin one wheel set other motion convers momentum one decreas other follow suit bank union fiscal union econom union polit union transmit reinforc dynam european integr last year announc concern outright monetari transact reassur market confid slowli return recent data show growth follow lag job prospect slowli improv imbal gradual reced deleverag recapitalis start european countri turn around yet risk extrem outcom reced situat still fragil must exploit room manoeuvr hope jean monnet right note europ forg crise sum solut adopt crise look ahead secur level play field bank system across europ reduc risk financi crise reduc impact occur ensur bank contribut financi stabil prosper split question three part seen relat similar global fail bank govern risk manag capit adequaci basel iii basi global bank reform effort increas resili bank system recov market confid provid level play field industri basel iii provid opportun ensur harmonis set prudenti rule credit institut across everi countri eu basel iii transpos two piec legisl name capit requir direct capit requir regul negoti item legisl enter forc januari intens welcom avail uniform rule standard make sure also implement common way thus need overcom waiver except well grandfath claim option andrea enria chair eba share panel confer frankfurt last week mention flexibl still exist even new framework crisi shown econom monetari union cannot function without bank union build one ground tackl doom loop curb financi fragment enabl bank rebuild trust provid sustain suppli credit real economi everi countri everi sector regul establish singl supervisori mechan ssm recent approv european parliament process final agre european council ecb central author ssm support nation supervisori author mandat supervis whole bank sector euro area plus noneuro area member state wish join ecb entrust whole toolbox bank supervis includ authoris withdraw bank licenc collect offsit inform undertak onsit inspect cooper nation supervisor valid bank intern model risk control whenev necessari ecb also abl solicit addit capit liquid prudenti requir huge set respons ssm draw extens upon expertis nation supervisor basi ssm activ supervisor eu singl rulebook high level embed ecb supervisori manual instal singl supervisori approach suffici granular overcom fragment regul moment appear ecb direct supervis approxim bank found signific accord criteria laid ssm regul less activ euro area bank counterpart monetari oper nevertheless cover around total bank asset bank would realist even desir ecb supervis addit credit institut given also wealth expertis nation level advantag stem proxim supervis answer clear effici decentralis supervisori activ within ssm bring effect decisionmak twotier system impli differ treatment differ two group bank concern degre centralis supervisori action within ssm singl ssm ensur appli common supervisori approach bank first supervisori manual bind bank ssm supervis although allevi report might envisag less signific institut second nation supervisori author compli ecb regul guidelin general instruct third ecb access data bank andfin ecb decid exercis supervisori power direct face huge logist challeng vast amount preparatori work readi month regul enter forc includ select high skill staff draw final list signific bank direct supervis ecb harmonis supervisori approach report requir map euro area bank system develop supervisori manual publish framework regul within six month public consult task alreadi complet around nineti per cent next big challeng design undertak asset qualiti review aqr comprehens balanc sheet assess essenti ensur ssm get good start avoid reput damag stem possibl emerg problem bank earli day oper like due dilig actual start bank union consist risk assess basi aqr aqr flow stress test joint taken eba three element must complet ssm becom oper togeth allow comprehens view bank balanc sheet bring togeth quantit qualit aspect bank outstand risk risk risk alreadi present one may emerg time aqr therefor rather static pointintim exercis accord rigor standard aspect asset qualiti emphasi level provis forward look assess could provid baselin scenario stress test us exercis unpreced scale also call extern expert enhanc credibl ssm regul provid clear separ monetari polici supervisori task latter entrust newli establish supervisori board organis separ necessari compli increas account requir supervisori function still respect independ monetari polici function govern council deliber supervisori matter strict separ includ separ agenda meet ssm also account framework visàvi european parliament eurogroup nation parliament appli chair ssm supervisori board ssm ecb presid intend avoid confus among two set task also public percept protect ecb independ last beyond clear separ mandat decisionmak process rule instrument two function ecb need exchang inform reap synergi exampl financi stabil function thus macroprudenti task roof central bank cours noth new differ microprudenti perspect most dock nation central bank therefor make sens differ institut arrang macroprudenti decisionmak within ssm foreseen microprudenti latter case need clear separ function ecb monetari policymak supervisor bank supervis effect singl resolut mechan srm also indispens resolv nonviabl bank without srm might face misalign incent supervisori resolut function moreov supervisor judgment must also enforc commiss recent propos set singl resolut author back singl bank resolut fund author fund must separ ssm independ supran joint constitut singl resolut system abil interven direct bank loss divid among sharehold creditor pleas note go joint srm bewar present countri nation resolut author fund one set one rapid fact supervisor could face dilemma one hand may danger contagion financi market panic support insolv bank central bank liquid might give rise zombi weaken credibl bank supervis resolut thus bank union whole therefor strong support timelin envisag srm start function januari import prerequisit srm bank recoveri resolut direct direct still agre european parliament view push start date bailin full resolut toolbox avail outset instead overextend state aid rule proxi futur burden bank failur shift away public sharehold creditor first bear resolut cost insuffici bank industri whole step via resolut fund make fiscal backstop last resort ensur adequ lossabsorb capac bank fulfil minimum requir fund elig liabil bailin bank union end instrument yes euro area financ real economi origin bank sector genuin bank integr import mani respect integr bank market intensifi competit chang focal point strategi bank financi market particip competit mean exist capit alloc effici promot access new fund opportun compani encourag invest thus contribut growth small mediums enterpris direct access capit market may benefit ecb integr bank space eas monetari polici transmiss effect monetari polici success european bank union also reliev ecb task undertaken crisi need nonstandard measur moreov financi market integr help smooth effect asymmetr shock incom insur countri resid hold claim dividend interest rental revenu countri us risk share shown far import feder budget transfer talk flaw emu design bit reduct certain doesn captur depth repair work go europ euro area particular fact ad new foundat framework brought us far could couldn cope system crisi actual aggrav need determin complet constitut framework envisag four union four cogwheel must work togeth synchronis manner one direct must complac wait see happen next recent year signific part bank system sever countri kept aliv public capit inject state guarante plus liquid support ecb bank longer master destini hindsight mani generat instabl becam part problem need activ part solut henc call european bank union biggest cogwheel complet right hope agre come long way sinc start crisi still go implement bank union take great deal hard work cooper howev place shall healthier financi system conclud let quot alexi de tocquevill cannot help fear men may reach point look everi new theori danger everi innov toilsom troubl everi social advanc first step toward revolut may absolut refus move thank attent see also shambaugh j c euro three crise brook paper econom activ spring schoenmak d financi trilemma econom letter pp see also mongelli mutat euro area crisi balanc sceptic advoc shift ecb occasion paper http www ecb europa eupubpdfscpopsecbocp pdf four presid european council european commiss eurogroup ecb european council toward genuin econom monetari union june http www consilium europa euuedocscms_datadocspressdataenec pdf see mersch y regim chang supervis resolut speech european supervisor educ ese confer frankfurt septemb methodolog devis ecb includ least bank total valu asset billion ii bank repres domest gdp unless less billion asset iii three signific bank countri iv bank receiv direct assist efsfesm furthermor ecb time decid exercis direct supervis bank consid necessari reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en