Jürgen Stark: Contribution to the session on “Implications for the conduct of monetary policy”,07-03-2008,European Central Bank,ECB,2656,"<p>John Taylor has discussed a number of challenges to monetary policy-making in an era of globalisation. In my remarks, I will focus on the implications of globalisation specifically for monetary policy-making in the euro area. [1]We all agree that globalisation offers great opportunities. It increases the scope for efficiency gains through specialisation since it allows economies to make better use of their comparative advantage in international production. This reduces production costs and expands the production frontier, generating gains which are passed on to consumers through lower prices for many goods. Globalisation thus fosters economic prosperity and raises living standards. At the same time, the gains from globalisation may not be distributed evenly, as globalisation can affect differently the returns to different factors of production. [2] To monetary policy-makers, globalisation is important mainly for two reasons: First, the process of globalisation itself can occasionally lead to economic disruptions, especially if markets lack transparency. Increasingly-globalised and internationally-integrated financial markets, for example, if not sufficiently transparent, can at times be conducive to excessive risk-taking and contagion effects – a theme that rings particularly true in light of the current financial turmoil. Second, and more importantly, increasing global integration induces structural changes in goods markets and financial markets alike. As a result, foreign shocks may have a greater impact on domestic inflation, and the transmission of other impulses to the euro area economy can change. This also applies to the impact of monetary policy on inflation.Let me briefly elaborate on how structural changes, which are driven by globalisation, can affect the process of inflation. There is good reason, for instance, to believe that globalisation increases competitive pressures, both worldwide and in domestic markets. An increase in competition may – relative to previous periods – put downward pressure on wages and prices and thus contain inflation for a period of time. [3] A structural intensification of competition would also induce firms to work harder to increase productivity, and this would translate into an increase in the growth rate of the natural level of output. [4] Beyond this effect, the increasing use of international production opportunities based on comparative advantage may lead to a change in the production structure of our economy, which would in turn alter the relative scarcity of production factors, and thus the response of their prices and the prices of final goods to economic shocks.Thus, globalisation is of importance to monetary policy and it is likely to have a lasting effect on our economy and on the environment for monetary policy-making. An initial conclusion therefore is that central banks need to continue to commit resources to analyse and closely monitor the structural changes and the shocks caused by globalisation, and need to build an increasing awareness of economic and financial developments outside their home countries. Although globalisation is challenging monetary policy, I fully agree with John Taylor’s assessment that globalisation does not fundamentally alter the rules for monetary policy-making. Nowadays as ever, over the medium to longer term, inflation is a monetary phenomenon. This means price stability is for us to achieve.Let me stress the obvious here, namely that central banks cannot permanently determine the relative prices of specific goods. In referring to price stability, we mean stability of the purchasing power (of the domestic legal tender) as measured by the cost of a representative basket of goods.While international liquidity conditions may influence market interest rates and thus the transmission of monetary policy to real activity and inflation, central banks retain the ability to control short-term interest rates by appropriately influencing the supply of the domestic legal tender. Short-term rates in turn work their way into the domestic cost of credit and into long-term interest rates. Therefore, central banks can ensure price stability in the medium to long-term, even in a financially-integrated world in which production factors and goods move freely, and even if the size of the world economy increases relative to that of the domestic economy. [5] But, as I said earlier, as a precondition for successful monetary policy central banks need to properly adapt their analyses to the changing environment. In such an environment, it is clearly important for stability-orientated monetary policy to analyse developments in external prices, in international trade flows and in international financial flows. This said, I agree with John Taylor that developments in exchange rates per se should not be given any special status but should be taken into account by monetary policy only to the extent that they have a medium-term influence on price stability. This is because another fundamental law of monetary economics is alive and well in the globalised economy: flexible exchange rates are a sine qua non for price stability. With a growing set of prices and asset valuations being determined internationally, information on international developments is crucial for monetary policy-making. In this light, the financial turmoil in particular has shown the value that growing financial globalisation places on a timely and open international exchange of information among central banks and regulators. Central banks should therefore cooperate by exchanging information and by designing a solid international financial architecture. Beyond that, however, the scope for monetary policy-makers to coordinate is limited. This is the case as each central bank has just one policy instrument, and this instrument can only achieve a single domestic objective, price stability. As a consequence, each central bank is well advised to react to foreign developments only if these become relevant for domestic price stability. I therefore fully agree with John Taylor’s conclusion that central banks should not mechanically follow other central banks’ policy decisions. Not least as a result of this consensus, I question the strong conclusions that John Taylor draws from some of his empirical analysis. In brief, John Taylor finds that a simple monetary policy rule, also widely referred to as the “Taylor rule”, when applied to the euro area, has residuals that correlate positively with the US federal funds rate. He interprets this finding as implying a leader-follower structure in the sense that US monetary policy induces the ECB to deviate from its objective of price stability out of concern for the exchange rate. This is not the case. Indeed, a more reasonable explanation for John Taylor’s findings is the following: Central banks which are concerned with domestic price stability seek to offset potentially destabilising shocks. In a globalised world, though, different central banks naturally respond in part to similar global factors. And, as we know, a number of these factors are not well captured by a mechanical policy rule of the type which John Taylor takes as a benchmark for good monetary policy-making. Adequate policy reactions to global factors, and to the risks that they pose for domestic price stability, will thus show up – within the context of a simple rule – in the residual term. Some observers, John Taylor included, interpret this residual as a measure of the monetary stance. It may indeed, in some cases, be possible to interpret the residual in this way. However, often the residual is a measure of the lack of explanatory power of the simple policy rule itself.Now, to the extent that economies are structurally different and are hit by shocks with different timings, global factors affect these economies with different lags.As a result, the measures of inflation and the output gap used in John Taylor’s policy rule are also affected with different lags. In such a context, monetary policy has to react in a pre-emptive manner to current and future likely developments to ensure domestic price stability over the medium to longer term. However, such a behaviour might generate a spurious correlation between the residuals of a simple Taylor type policy rule for the euro area and interest rates in other economies. I suspect that this is what lies behind John Taylor’s result concerning the deviations from a euro area “policy rule” and the US federal funds rate. Having inside knowledge, I can in fact rule out that John Taylor’s results constitute any sign of a leader-follower structure or any sign of a focus on the side of the ECB on the dollar-euro exchange rate, or in fact on any exchange rate, as a target of policy. Neither is the case. I agree with John Taylor, however, that any development in that direction would be deeply worrying.Only a clear assignment of responsibilities ensures clarity about the central bank’s objective, which is at the heart of successful monetary policy. Yet international complementarities exist in monetary policymaking, to the extent that an international architecture which has each central bank keeping its own house in order is also conducive to an environment of global monetary stability. Such architecture provides the best basis for a friendly and open exchange of views and information at an international level. Today there is frequent interaction as, for example, the BIS provides a much-appreciated forum for discussion among central bankers. In addition, there are further occasions for fruitful exchanges – this very symposium being one of them.I have argued that the best international monetary architecture is one in which each central bank focuses on achieving domestic price stability. In practice, even more is needed to guarantee a successful monetary policy. A clear mandate for price stability and a well-defined monetary policy strategy based on this mandate are essential for coping successfully with the analytical and practical challenges which lie ahead. Fortunately, both conditions are in place in the euro area. A clear mandate for price stability ensures that a central bank is fully accountable for achieving price stability. The commitment to price stability which such a mandate generates is, in turn, conducive to anchoring private sector expectations in a lasting way. This anchoring is particularly important if globalisation causes sequences of one-sided shocks to inflation. prevents central bank policy from going astray. While John Taylor expresses concerns that central banks may be increasingly tempted to stabilise exchange rates at the expense of price stability, a clear mandate for price stability guarantees that a central bank will not fall into this trap. Instead price stability-orientated central banks do not assign any special role to exchange rates, important as they are as information variables in the economic analysis. Building on a clear mandate, a successful strategy supports accountability. ensures a transparent and systematic response to risks to price stability guides an effective communication policy, and enhances the predictability of monetary policy over the medium to longer term.In this context, any measure of price stability used by central banks must adequately reflect the evolution of the purchasing power of money. Price stability is therefore best defined in terms of the cost of a representative, i.e. broad, basket of goods. An example which provides a clear and assessable yardstick of price stability is the basket underlying the euro area Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. This encompassing definition of the underlying basket contrasts with partial, or so-called “core” measures of inflation. While these measures can be useful for assessing risks to price stability, they – if put front and centre – risk providing a distorted view of underlying price developments which would jeopardise the anchoring of inflation expectations. This would be particularly detrimental in situations in which globalisation might induce sustained movements of prices of certain categories of goods. A broad, transparent and widely accepted yardstick instead creates the necessary clarity to ensure a firm anchoring of inflation expectations. It is this clarity which allows a central bank to adopt a medium-term orientation within which policy-makers can appropriately discount short-term price volatility and transitory movements in inflation.As mentioned, globalisation is likely to change the structure of the euro area economy both with regard to goods markets and financial markets. A strategy which monitors structural changes both from a goods market angle and from a financial or monetary point of view is therefore well-suited to cope with the challenges brought about by globalisation. The complementary perspectives of the economic analysis and the monetary analysis, which underlie the ECB’s “two-pillar strategy”, are conducive to appropriately adapting our policies to the changing environment. At the same time, the two-pillar strategy keeps minds focused on the fundamental laws of monetary economics.In particular, having an explicit monetary pillar guarantees that the ECB always has considerable expertise in the analysis of monetary and credit developments and in the analysis of their impact on price stability. The close link between monetary developments and evolving imbalances in asset and credit markets implies that monetary analysis enables central banks to detect such imbalances at an early stage and to respond to the implied risks to price and financial stability in a timely and forward-looking manner. This has, in the past, proved an invaluable asset for the ECB, notably in times of global financial turbulence. Just as the two-pillar strategy structures the discussion within the ECB, it also provides the basis for communicating our understanding of the economy to the outside world. By adhering to transparency, the ECB has achieved a high level of predictability for its monetary policy decisions. Our strategy therefore improves our policy effectiveness. Let me conclude. Especially in an environment of ongoing globalisation, monetary policy must aim to robustly anchor inflation expectations. This requires a permanent alertness to risks to price stability on the side of the central bank, as shocks to inflation must not translate into second-round effects in price-setting and wage-setting. That being said, an efficient adjustment of the economy to macroeconomic shocks can be best facilitated by monetary policy-makers if they keep a firm focus on their domestic price stability objective. In particular, there will be no external stability without domestic price stability.Domestic price stability is a precondition for global monetary stability. Globalisation therefore does not expand the need for international monetary co-operation beyond an open exchange of views and information. The best international architecture is one in which each central bank has a clear mandate to focus on domestic price stability.Greater microeconomic flexibility would not only allow our economy to take better advantage of the opportunities provided by globalisation, but would also facilitate macroeconomic adjustment in the wake of shocks and improve the resilience of the economy. Globalisation therefore intensifies the need for more flexibility in product and labour markets. I have argued that a monetary policy strategy which carefully monitors developments in domestic, as well as international, financial and goods markets is well-equipped to cope with challenges that globalisation brings for monetary policy. Such a strategy is in place in the euro area. At the same time, price stability is the best contribution monetary policy can make to enable the euro area economy to take the full advantage of the opportunities offered by globalisation.[1] For stylised facts about trade globalisation and its likely effects on euro area inflation, see also the ECB Monthly Bulletin article entitled “Globalisation, trade and the euro area macroeconomy”, (January 2008). [2] Trade theory (Stolper-Samuelson theorem) would e.g. suggest that trade integration should place downward pressures on the relative return to lower-skilled labour. However, real wage developments have been similar across all skill groups in the euro area. See ECB (2008), op. cit. [3] While globalisation and the disciplining impact that it exerted on pricing and cost control is likely to have facilitated disinflation around the globe in the past ten years or so, globalisation per se cannot permanently reduce inflation. The main reason for the observed spread of low inflation around the globe in recent years is a change in monetary policymaking in many countries, and, more in particular, the change towards a credible commitment to price stability.[4] That is, it would lead to an increase in the rate at which the economy can grow without jeopardising price stability. [5] See, e.g., M. Woodford (2007), “Globalization and Monetary Control,” NBER Working Paper No. 13329, to appear in Galí, J. and M. Gertler eds., The international dimensions of monetary policy, University of Chicago Press.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",taylor discuss number challeng monetari policymak era globalis remark focus implic globalis specif monetari policymak euro area agre globalis offer great opportun increas scope effici gain specialis sinc allow economi make better use compar advantag intern product reduc product cost expand product frontier generat gain pass consum lower price mani good globalis thus foster econom prosper rais live standard time gain globalis may distribut even globalis affect differ return differ factor product monetari policymak globalis import main two reason first process globalis occasion lead econom disrupt especi market lack transpar increasinglyglobalis internationallyintegr financi market exampl suffici transpar time conduc excess risktak contagion effect theme ring particular true light current financi turmoil second import increas global integr induc structur chang good market financi market alik result foreign shock may greater impact domest inflat transmiss impuls euro area economi chang also appli impact monetari polici inflat let briefli elabor structur chang driven globalis affect process inflat good reason instanc believ globalis increas competit pressur worldwid domest market increas competit may relat previous period put downward pressur wage price thus contain inflat period time structur intensif competit would also induc firm work harder increas product would translat increas growth rate natur level output beyond effect increas use intern product opportun base compar advantag may lead chang product structur economi would turn alter relat scarciti product factor thus respons price price final good econom shock thus globalis import monetari polici like last effect economi environ monetari policymak initi conclus therefor central bank need continu commit resourc analys close monitor structur chang shock caus globalis need build increas awar econom financi develop outsid home countri although globalis challeng monetari polici fulli agre taylor assess globalis fundament alter rule monetari policymak nowaday ever medium longer term inflat monetari phenomenon mean price stabil us achiev let stress obvious name central bank cannot perman determin relat price specif good refer price stabil mean stabil purchas power domest legal tender measur cost repres basket good intern liquid condit may influenc market interest rate thus transmiss monetari polici real activ inflat central bank retain abil control shortterm interest rate appropri influenc suppli domest legal tender shortterm rate turn work way domest cost credit longterm interest rate therefor central bank ensur price stabil medium longterm even financiallyintegr world product factor good move freeli even size world economi increas relat domest economi said earlier precondit success monetari polici central bank need proper adapt analys chang environ environ clear import stabilityorient monetari polici analys develop extern price intern trade flow intern financi flow said agre taylor develop exchang rate per se given special status taken account monetari polici extent mediumterm influenc price stabil anoth fundament law monetari econom aliv well globalis economi flexibl exchang rate sine qua non price stabil grow set price asset valuat determin intern inform intern develop crucial monetari policymak light financi turmoil particular shown valu grow financi globalis place time open intern exchang inform among central bank regul central bank therefor cooper exchang inform design solid intern financi architectur beyond howev scope monetari policymak coordin limit case central bank one polici instrument instrument achiev singl domest object price stabil consequ central bank well advis react foreign develop becom relev domest price stabil therefor fulli agre taylor conclus central bank mechan follow central bank polici decis least result consensus question strong conclus taylor draw empir analysi brief taylor find simpl monetari polici rule also wide refer taylor rule appli euro area residu correl posit us feder fund rate interpret find impli leaderfollow structur sens us monetari polici induc ecb deviat object price stabil concern exchang rate case inde reason explan taylor find follow central bank concern domest price stabil seek offset potenti destabilis shock globalis world though differ central bank natur respond part similar global factor know number factor well captur mechan polici rule type taylor take benchmark good monetari policymak adequ polici reaction global factor risk pose domest price stabil thus show within context simpl rule residu term observ taylor includ interpret residu measur monetari stanc may inde case possibl interpret residu way howev often residu measur lack explanatori power simpl polici rule extent economi structur differ hit shock differ time global factor affect economi differ lag result measur inflat output gap use taylor polici rule also affect differ lag context monetari polici react preemptiv manner current futur like develop ensur domest price stabil medium longer term howev behaviour might generat spurious correl residu simpl taylor type polici rule euro area interest rate economi suspect lie behind taylor result concern deviat euro area polici rule us feder fund rate insid knowledg fact rule taylor result constitut sign leaderfollow structur sign focus side ecb dollareuro exchang rate fact exchang rate target polici neither case agre taylor howev develop direct would deepli worri clear assign respons ensur clariti central bank object heart success monetari polici yet intern complementar exist monetari policymak extent intern architectur central bank keep hous order also conduc environ global monetari stabil architectur provid best basi friend open exchang view inform intern level today frequent interact exampl bis provid muchappreci forum discuss among central banker addit occas fruit exchang symposium one argu best intern monetari architectur one central bank focus achiev domest price stabil practic even need guarante success monetari polici clear mandat price stabil welldefin monetari polici strategi base mandat essenti cope success analyt practic challeng lie ahead fortun condit place euro area clear mandat price stabil ensur central bank fulli account achiev price stabil commit price stabil mandat generat turn conduc anchor privat sector expect last way anchor particular import globalis caus sequenc onesid shock inflat prevent central bank polici go astray taylor express concern central bank may increas tempt stabilis exchang rate expens price stabil clear mandat price stabil guarante central bank fall trap instead price stabilityorient central bank assign special role exchang rate import inform variabl econom analysi build clear mandat success strategi support account ensur transpar systemat respons risk price stabil guid effect communic polici enhanc predict monetari polici medium longer term context measur price stabil use central bank must adequ reflect evolut purchas power money price stabil therefor best defin term cost repres e broad basket good exampl provid clear assess yardstick price stabil basket under euro area harmonis index consum price encompass definit under basket contrast partial socal core measur inflat measur use assess risk price stabil put front centr risk provid distort view under price develop would jeopardis anchor inflat expect would particular detriment situat globalis might induc sustain movement price certain categori good broad transpar wide accept yardstick instead creat necessari clariti ensur firm anchor inflat expect clariti allow central bank adopt mediumterm orient within policymak appropri discount shortterm price volatil transitori movement inflat mention globalis like chang structur euro area economi regard good market financi market strategi monitor structur chang good market angl financi monetari point view therefor wellsuit cope challeng brought globalis complementari perspect econom analysi monetari analysi underli ecb twopillar strategi conduc appropri adapt polici chang environ time twopillar strategi keep mind focus fundament law monetari econom particular explicit monetari pillar guarante ecb alway consider expertis analysi monetari credit develop analysi impact price stabil close link monetari develop evolv imbal asset credit market impli monetari analysi enabl central bank detect imbal earli stage respond impli risk price financi stabil time forwardlook manner past prove invalu asset ecb notabl time global financi turbul twopillar strategi structur discuss within ecb also provid basi communic understand economi outsid world adher transpar ecb achiev high level predict monetari polici decis strategi therefor improv polici effect let conclud especi environ ongo globalis monetari polici must aim robust anchor inflat expect requir perman alert risk price stabil side central bank shock inflat must translat secondround effect priceset wageset said effici adjust economi macroeconom shock best facilit monetari policymak keep firm focus domest price stabil object particular extern stabil without domest price stabil domest price stabil precondit global monetari stabil globalis therefor expand need intern monetari cooper beyond open exchang view inform best intern architectur one central bank clear mandat focus domest price stabil greater microeconom flexibl would allow economi take better advantag opportun provid globalis would also facilit macroeconom adjust wake shock improv resili economi globalis therefor intensifi need flexibl product labour market argu monetari polici strategi care monitor develop domest well intern financi good market wellequip cope challeng globalis bring monetari polici strategi place euro area time price stabil best contribut monetari polici make enabl euro area economi take full advantag opportun offer globalis stylis fact trade globalis like effect euro area inflat see also ecb month bulletin articl entitl globalis trade euro area macroeconomi januari trade theori stolpersamuelson theorem would e g suggest trade integr place downward pressur relat return lowerskil labour howev real wage develop similar across skill group euro area see ecb op cit globalis disciplin impact exert price cost control like facilit disinfl around globe past ten year globalis per se cannot perman reduc inflat main reason observ spread low inflat around globe recent year chang monetari policymak mani countri particular chang toward credibl commit price stabil would lead increas rate economi grow without jeopardis price stabil see e g m woodford global monetari control nber work paper appear galí j m gertler ed intern dimens monetari polici univers chicago press reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en