Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The world after the crisis: Designing the future. A monetary order for the XXI century,23-06-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,2794,"<p>I would like first of all to thank the organisers for inviting me to participate in this panel discussion on a new Monetary Order for the XXI Century [1]. The title seems to suggest that we had a monetary order in the previous century, but then we lost it in the course of this decade and we now need something new. In fact, we have been searching for a new monetary order since the fall of the Bretton Woods agreement, in the summer of 1971, and even that order was not so orderly, after all. I will not try to define what a monetary order is. [2] What we ultimately need is a framework in which payment flows between residents of different countries ensure smooth trading in goods, services and financial assets. It matters not only because international trade is an engine for growth but also because payments imbalances are a natural result of non-barter economies. Actually, the more developed the financial sector is, the easier it is to finance an imbalance between inward and outward payments, to the extent that the debt can be repaid or the credit can be cashed in. We could thus define a viable monetary order as one in which the credibility of the debtor and in the worthiness of the creditor can be maintained, while preserving the stability of the underlying real and financial markets.We know that a country’s purchases of goods and services from the rest of the world do not match at each and every point in time its sales, and therefore that its balance of payments is in fact unbalanced. Such an imbalance may be a good thing, and be fully consistent with economic fundamentals, for two reasons. First, countries, just like individuals, want to smooth consumption over time. Those that have a large productive potential and a young population tend to borrow so as to be able to invest in their future; those that are rich and have a middle-aged population tend to repay debt and save for when the population is older and less active. [3] Thus, a functioning international monetary order allows countries to smooth consumption over time, just as a bank does for individuals.The second benefit of a well-functioning international monetary system is that it enables countries to insure against bad times. In particular, a country that is a net lender to the rest of the world – by exporting and saving more than it imports and consumes – is able to draw on those savings invested abroad when it falls on hard times. Such a risk-sharing mechanism [4] has indeed been an important reason for the economic stability we observed for much of the 1990s and 2000s in advanced economies. In fact, this benefit was for a long time during the last decade regarded as a major economic achievement. Yet the increased financial integration of countries, and precisely this insurance mechanism, may also have played a role in the spreading of the current financial crisis to virtually every open economy in the world. A key point is that there is a limit to the extent to which the rest of the world can finance a country’s external imbalance. In a well-functioning monetary order, both policy-makers and markets should be able to assess the limits of the external funds available for a country to finance its payments deficit, before such a limit is reached and to take corrective action.We know that this limit is very difficult to assess, because it depends on the specific domestic and international circumstances. The more sophisticated the financial markets are, the more easily a country can finance its payments deficit; and the less urgently needed is a policy to adjust the domestic economy. I can still hear Alan Greenspan saying: “ it is tempting to conclude that the US current account deficit is essentially a by-product of long-term secular forces, and thus is largely benign. After all, we do seem to have been able to finance our international current account deficit with relative ease in recent years.” [5]A key question, ultimately, is: who should decide what a sustainable payments deficit is? The answers to this question, both right and wrong, have marked the evolution of the international monetary system since the Second World War. Allow me a brief retrospective. Under the Bretton Woods agreement, the availability of international liquidity, ultimately in the form of gold, was the binding criterion for fostering a country to adjust its external imbalances. The system broke up because the US did not have enough gold to finance its imbalances, and did not want to live within those constraints, as it had to finance the Vietnam war. The move to a flexible exchange regime in the early 1970s was expected to solve the problem. The thinking at that time was that a country’s balance of payments is by definition in balance in a floating system, because the exchange rate adjusts to ensure such a balance. Defining the limits of a sustainable payments deficit, beyond which financing would start to become problematic, was considered as a non-problem. The market would decide. That was the consensus at the time. Not many disagreed. I still remember my surprise when Robert Triffin – who chaired my Bachelor’s dissertation committee in Louvain in 1978 – asked me “ Should the US adjust or finance their current account deficit?” I gave the textbook answer, but he didn’t look so convinced. Financial markets are indeed expected to finance external deficits, until they decide not to do so any more, at least not at the prevailing price (i.e. exchange rate). And when such a decision is made, the adjustment can be rather violent. We had the experience of markets simply refusing to finance external imbalances in the 1980s and 1990s, producing major exchange rate adjustments leading to financial crises. However, this concerned mainly developing and emerging markets. Furthermore, the crises often happened in countries which refused to allow their currencies to fully float. In most cases, the crisis erupted because countries were trying to peg their exchange rates at overvalued levels. One of the lessons of the Asian crisis in the late 1990s, in particular, was that countries should either let their exchange rates float in order to avoid accumulating excessive external imbalances, or adjust their macroeconomic policies to ensure consistency with their peg. [6] We entered this century with a new consensus, in which policy-makers took a back seat and relied heavily on markets to allocate capital across countries, while the IMF was mandated to exert a strong surveillance role with a view to ensuring transparency and encouraging early adjustment. This was the consensus reached at the G7 Summit in Cologne, in 1999, which was later adopted by the G20. The expectations have not been fully met, for several reasons. First, several emerging market economies have not let their currencies float freely, and have continued to peg their exchange rates, although at undervalued rates (instead of overvalued). The reason has not only been a fear of floating but also a desire to promote exports as well as to accumulate reserves as a self-insurance policy in case of a crisis. In turn, the accumulation of large surpluses, especially in emerging Asia and in oil-exporting countries, has made possible the financing of the US current account deficit. It has also influenced monetary conditions in the US, lowering long term interest rates and making monetary conditions more expansionary than would otherwise have been the case. The second reason is that the IMF has not succeeded in convincing countries to pursue macroeconomic policies consistent with sustainable current account positions. Advanced economies, in particular the US, have not taken IMF advice fully into consideration in their decision-making. Emerging economies, partly following the example given by the advanced countries, have also attached less importance to IMF surveillance. The accumulation of external assets has made them less dependent on IMF funding and advice. For example, the IMF has not succeeded in completing an Art. IV surveillance programme with China since 2006. Furthermore, the IMF has been reproached by emerging market economies of lacking legitimacy, in view of their relatively low quota and representation. What is the lesson to be learned from the experience of the last ten years and from the crisis? Either the recommendations contained in the consensus prevailing after the Asian crisis were wrong or they were not appropriately implemented. I tend to side with the last view. The lesson that I would thus draw from the crisis is that those recommendations which were not implemented over the last decade should now be strengthened.The fact that the crisis has restored the IMF to its place at the heart of the international financial system should provide some hope in this respect. However, over recent months the Fund has concentrated mainly on crisis resolution. On the other hand, if we are striving for an international monetary order in which crises are the exception, the Fund has to have a greater role in prevention. In this respect, the discussions that have taken place in most international fora after the burst of the crisis have focussed mainly on strengthened regulatory and prudential measures, not on macroeconomic surveilance. One could even see a risk that the way in which this crisis is being addressed could weaken the Fund’s preventive tools, at least with respect to macroeconomic policies. Let me elaborate.One element of concern is that, even after the crisis, the IMF has not been able to convince its members that large external imbalances constitute a serious threat to global financial and economic stability. The crisis is seen by several key players as unrelated to the accumulation of external imbalances, and thus unrelated to the way in which the international financial system works. The IMF itself seems to favour the view that the origins of this crisis are not to be found in the members’ policies, nor in external imbalances, but in insufficient regulation and supervision and in the improper behaviour of market participants. [7] There is a wide range of literature, including that published by the IMF until 2007, showing how global savings–investment imbalances have played a fundamental role that must not be neglected. [8] These imbalances were ultimately the symptom of the creation of excessive international liquidity by countries like the United States and of excessive savings by countries like China, and were associated with a reduction in the cost of capital and interest rates, in particular in the United States. This spurred an unsustainable boom in consumption as well as excessive risk-taking, both among consumers and financial institutions. These imbalances contributed to the large financial distortions and bubbles in global financial markets, which created the preconditions for today’s crisis. Neglecting imbalances as a source of risk is not the best way to improve the crisis prevention arm of the IMF.How can we expect the international monetary order to develop? And how can we strike a better balance between financing and adjustment?There is a risk that the forces favouring earlier and more effective adjustment of imbalances, and thus helping to avoid financing crises, have been weakened. In the current discussion on the reform of the international financial system, not many are suggesting that the IMF should play a stronger role in preventing the accumulation of excessive external imbalances and in fostering more disciplined domestic policies. Just to give an example, the Decision on Bilateral Surveillance over Members’ Policies, aimed at identifying fundamental exchange rate misalignments, has been modified to allow greater discretion in surveillance, especially exchange rates. This might look like a tactical choice, but I doubt that it will result in a tougher hand for the IMF.While emerging and developing countries are requesting a stronger voice in the IMF, they also seem to be suggesting that they would like this institution to be less intrusive, imposing less conditionality while at the same time providing more and cheaper financing. Advanced economies seem to be supporting this view, having inundated the IMF with funds, most of them available with very little conditionality or none at all. This might be appropriate in times of systemic crisis but cannot be sustainable in normal times. Some thought should perhaps also be given to the need for a strategy to exit from cheap and unconditional IMF financing. Overall, most of the IMF’s shareholders seem to favour making IMF financing easier. The idea of enhancing the role of the SDR, or another world reserve currency, goes towards facilitating the financing needs of both deficit and surplus countries. For deficit countries, this idea aims to make it easier to borrow outside the markets, from international institutions, giving the issuer of such currency some form of international lender-of-last-resort function. For surplus countries, it aims to reduce the devaluation risk of those countries that want to accumulate reserves. It is not clear, under these circumstances, how the risk of excessive imbalances would be perceived by both creditors and debtors. The real risk is that the adjustment takes place even later, while imbalances are left to accumulate for a longer period of time. But under these circumstances the crisis could be even greater, and the ex post adjustment even harsher. That is the experience of the gold standard, the last world currency.In sum, a new world monetary order – that is, a framework for payments between residents of different countries which ensures smooth trading in goods, services and financial assets – requires a mechanism to keep imbalances in check. Key elements of such a mechanism include a prominent role for the IMF in two essential areas: strong and effective surveillance in crisis prevention, and responsible lending, with appropriate limits and conditionality, to countries in need. This was the consensus prevailing until just before this crisis. There is a risk that the short-term objectives pursued to resolve the current crisis will change this consensus. A new monetary order must first and foremost aim to prevent crises, not to postpone them.[1] I wish to thank Marcel Fratscher, Ettore Dorrucci and Arnaud Mehl for their contributions. The opinions expressed reflect only mine.[2] The terms ‘order’ and ‘system’ are here used interchangeably. It should be borne in mind, however, that Mundell (1972) and McKinnon (1996) made a distinction between international monetary ‘order’ and ‘system’. According to their definitions, the order is the set of rules and the system the modus operandi of the order. See Robert Mundell, ‘The Future of the International Financial System’, in Acheson, J. Chant and Prachowny, Bretton Woods Revisited, University of Toronto Press, 1972. See also Ronald McKinnon, The Rules of the Game: International Money and Exchange Rates, MIT Press, Chapter II, 1996.[3] referred to as the life-cycle hypothesis of consumption for individuals (F. Modigliani and A. Ando, ‘The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving’, American Economic Review, 1963), which was reformulated for the behaviour of countries by Modigliani (1970), ‘The life cycle hypothesis of saving and intercountry differences in the saving ratio’, in: Eltis, Scott and Wolfe, eds., Induction, Growth and Trade: Essays in honour of Sir Roy Harrod (Clarendon Press, Oxford), 197-226.[4] For a comprehensive account of the functioning of risk-sharing across countries, see e.g. Lewis, K. (1996), ‘What Can Explain the Apparent Lack of International Consumption Risk Sharing’, Journal of Political Economy, 104(2), pp. 267-297.[5] Alan Greenspan: “International imbalances”, Remarks Before the Advancing Enterprise Conference, London, England, December 2, 2005[6] ‘ Exchange rate regimes for emerging market economies’, ECB Monthly Bulletin, February 2003.[7] See IMF (2009): ‘Lessons of the Global Crisis for Macroeconomic Policy’, 19 February 2009; Blanchard, O. (2008): ‘The Crisis: Basic Mechanisms, and Appropriate Policies’, MIT Working Paper 09-01.[8] See, among others: Trichet, J-C. (2009): ‘Macroeconomic policies, imbalances and the need to avoid going back to the status quo ante’, address at the Annual Joint Parliamentary Meeting of the European Parliament (Brussels, 16 February); Bracke, T., Bussière, M., Fidora, M., Straub, R.: (2008): ‘A Framework for Assessing Global Imbalances’, ECB Occasional Paper No 78 (January); Bracke, T. and Fidora, M.: (2008): ‘Global Liquidity Glut or Global Savings Glut? A Structural VAR Approach’, ECB Working Paper No 911 (June); Dorrucci, E., Meyer-Cirkel, A., and Santabárbara, D. (2009): ‘Domestic Financial Development in Emerging Economies: Evidence and Implications’, ECB Occasional Paper No 102 (April); Portes, R. (2009): ‘Global Imbalances’, in Dewatripont, Freixas and Portes (eds.), Macroeconomic Stability and Financial Regulation: Key Issues for the G20, CEPR. Visco, I. (2009): ‘The Global Crisis: The Role of Policies and the International Monetary System’, paper prepared for the G20 Workshop on the Macroeconomic Causes of the Crisis (Mumbai, 24-26 May). Moreover, among the many papers that had identified global imbalances as creating systemic risks for the global economy, see: IMF (2007): ‘Staff Report on the Multilateral Consultation on Global Imbalances with China, the Euro Area, Japan, Saudi Arabia, and the United States’ – prepared by a Staff Team from PDR, RES and WHD, approved by Mark Allen and Michael Deppler (29 June).Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",would like first thank organis invit particip panel discuss new monetari order xxi centuri titl seem suggest monetari order previous centuri lost cours decad need someth new fact search new monetari order sinc fall bretton wood agreement summer even order order tri defin monetari order ultim need framework payment flow resid differ countri ensur smooth trade good servic financi asset matter intern trade engin growth also payment imbal natur result nonbart economi actual develop financi sector easier financ imbal inward outward payment extent debt repaid credit cash could thus defin viabl monetari order one credibl debtor worthi creditor maintain preserv stabil under real financi market know countri purchas good servic rest world match everi point time sale therefor balanc payment fact unbalanc imbal may good thing fulli consist econom fundament two reason first countri like individu want smooth consumpt time larg product potenti young popul tend borrow abl invest futur rich middleag popul tend repay debt save popul older less activ thus function intern monetari order allow countri smooth consumpt time bank individu second benefit wellfunct intern monetari system enabl countri insur bad time particular countri net lender rest world export save import consum abl draw save invest abroad fall hard time riskshar mechan inde import reason econom stabil observ much advanc economi fact benefit long time last decad regard major econom achiev yet increas financi integr countri precis insur mechan may also play role spread current financi crisi virtual everi open economi world key point limit extent rest world financ countri extern imbal wellfunct monetari order policymak market abl assess limit extern fund avail countri financ payment deficit limit reach take correct action know limit difficult assess depend specif domest intern circumst sophist financi market easili countri financ payment deficit less urgent need polici adjust domest economi still hear alan greenspan say tempt conclud us current account deficit essenti byproduct longterm secular forc thus larg benign seem abl financ intern current account deficit relat eas recent year key question ultim decid sustain payment deficit answer question right wrong mark evolut intern monetari system sinc second world war allow brief retrospect bretton wood agreement avail intern liquid ultim form gold bind criterion foster countri adjust extern imbal system broke us enough gold financ imbal want live within constraint financ vietnam war move flexibl exchang regim earli expect solv problem think time countri balanc payment definit balanc float system exchang rate adjust ensur balanc defin limit sustain payment deficit beyond financ would start becom problemat consid nonproblem market would decid consensus time mani disagre still rememb surpris robert triffin chair bachelor dissert committe louvain ask us adjust financ current account deficit gave textbook answer didn look convinc financi market inde expect financ extern deficit decid least prevail price e exchang rate decis made adjust rather violent experi market simpli refus financ extern imbal produc major exchang rate adjust lead financi crise howev concern main develop emerg market furthermor crise often happen countri refus allow currenc fulli float case crisi erupt countri tri peg exchang rate overvalu level one lesson asian crisi late particular countri either let exchang rate float order avoid accumul excess extern imbal adjust macroeconom polici ensur consist peg enter centuri new consensus policymak took back seat reli heavili market alloc capit across countri imf mandat exert strong surveil role view ensur transpar encourag earli adjust consensus reach g summit cologn later adopt g expect fulli met sever reason first sever emerg market economi let currenc float freeli continu peg exchang rate although undervalu rate instead overvalu reason fear float also desir promot export well accumul reserv selfinsur polici case crisi turn accumul larg surplus especi emerg asia oilexport countri made possibl financ us current account deficit also influenc monetari condit us lower long term interest rate make monetari condit expansionari would otherwis case second reason imf succeed convinc countri pursu macroeconom polici consist sustain current account posit advanc economi particular us taken imf advic fulli consider decisionmak emerg economi part follow exampl given advanc countri also attach less import imf surveil accumul extern asset made less depend imf fund advic exampl imf succeed complet art iv surveil programm china sinc furthermor imf reproach emerg market economi lack legitimaci view relat low quota represent lesson learn experi last ten year crisi either recommend contain consensus prevail asian crisi wrong appropri implement tend side last view lesson would thus draw crisi recommend implement last decad strengthen fact crisi restor imf place heart intern financi system provid hope respect howev recent month fund concentr main crisi resolut hand strive intern monetari order crise except fund greater role prevent respect discuss taken place intern fora burst crisi focuss main strengthen regulatori prudenti measur macroeconom surveil one could even see risk way crisi address could weaken fund prevent tool least respect macroeconom polici let elabor one element concern even crisi imf abl convinc member larg extern imbal constitut serious threat global financi econom stabil crisi seen sever key player unrel accumul extern imbal thus unrel way intern financi system work imf seem favour view origin crisi found member polici extern imbal insuffici regul supervis improp behaviour market particip wide rang literatur includ publish imf show global save invest imbal play fundament role must neglect imbal ultim symptom creation excess intern liquid countri like unit state excess save countri like china associ reduct cost capit interest rate particular unit state spur unsustain boom consumpt well excess risktak among consum financi institut imbal contribut larg financi distort bubbl global financi market creat precondit today crisi neglect imbal sourc risk best way improv crisi prevent arm imf expect intern monetari order develop strike better balanc financ adjust risk forc favour earlier effect adjust imbal thus help avoid financ crise weaken current discuss reform intern financi system mani suggest imf play stronger role prevent accumul excess extern imbal foster disciplin domest polici give exampl decis bilater surveil member polici aim identifi fundament exchang rate misalign modifi allow greater discret surveil especi exchang rate might look like tactic choic doubt result tougher hand imf emerg develop countri request stronger voic imf also seem suggest would like institut less intrus impos less condit time provid cheaper financ advanc economi seem support view inund imf fund avail littl condit none might appropri time system crisi cannot sustain normal time thought perhap also given need strategi exit cheap uncondit imf financ overal imf sharehold seem favour make imf financ easier idea enhanc role sdr anoth world reserv currenc goe toward facilit financ need deficit surplus countri deficit countri idea aim make easier borrow outsid market intern institut give issuer currenc form intern lenderoflastresort function surplus countri aim reduc devalu risk countri want accumul reserv clear circumst risk excess imbal would perceiv creditor debtor real risk adjust take place even later imbal left accumul longer period time circumst crisi could even greater ex post adjust even harsher experi gold standard last world currenc sum new world monetari order framework payment resid differ countri ensur smooth trade good servic financi asset requir mechan keep imbal check key element mechan includ promin role imf two essenti area strong effect surveil crisi prevent respons lend appropri limit condit countri need consensus prevail crisi risk shortterm object pursu resolv current crisi chang consensus new monetari order must first foremost aim prevent crise postpon wish thank fratscher ettor dorrucci arnaud mehl contribut opinion express reflect mine term order system use interchang born mind howev mundel mckinnon made distinct intern monetari order system accord definit order set rule system modus operandi order see robert mundel futur intern financi system acheson j chant prachowni bretton wood revisit univers toronto press see also ronald mckinnon rule game intern money exchang rate mit press chapter ii refer lifecycl hypothesi consumpt individu f modigliani ando life cycl hypothesi save american econom review reformul behaviour countri modigliani life cycl hypothesi save intercountri differ save ratio elti scott wolf ed induct growth trade essay honour sir roy harrod clarendon press oxford comprehens account function riskshar across countri see e g lewi k explain appar lack intern consumpt risk share journal polit economi pp alan greenspan intern imbal remark advanc enterpris confer london england decemb exchang rate regim emerg market economi ecb month bulletin februari see imf lesson global crisi macroeconom polici februari blanchard o crisi basic mechan appropri polici mit work paper see among other trichet jc macroeconom polici imbal need avoid go back status quo ant address annual joint parliamentari meet european parliament brussel februari brack bussièr m fidora m straub r framework assess global imbal ecb occasion paper januari brack fidora m global liquid glut global save glut structur var approach ecb work paper june dorrucci e meyercirkel santabárbara d domest financi develop emerg economi evid implic ecb occasion paper april port r global imbal dewatripont freixa port ed macroeconom stabil financi regul key issu g cepr visco global crisi role polici intern monetari system paper prepar g workshop macroeconom caus crisi mumbai may moreov among mani paper identifi global imbal creat system risk global economi see imf staff report multilater consult global imbal china euro area japan saudi arabia unit state prepar staff team pdr res whd approv mark allen deppler june reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en