Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Ten years of the euro: Successes and challenges in light of the current financial market developments,06-05-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,5528,"<p>When Professor Krämer and I agreed on today’s meeting one year ago, our discussions took place against the backdrop of the first nine months of the financial market turbulence. Central banks had reacted and provided banks with additional funds in the form of reserves, in particular to stabilise the money market.Today, one year on, some additional challenges have been added to those we were facing then. I’m therefore very happy to have the opportunity to be here in Karlsruhe today to talk about the current challenges relating to monetary policy and our experiences during the first ten years of the euro. It is my pleasure to speak at the Hochschule Karlsruhe, which, since its foundation in 1878 under the name “Großherzogliche Badische Baugewerkeschule”, has, as your website informed me, become the most popular university in Germany with recruiters. In the nineteenth century, when the university was still operating under its original name, the official means of payment was the Mark, with Germany having adopted the gold standard in 1873. Under this currency arrangement, each country set the value of its currency in relation to gold. Coins were made out of gold and banknotes could be exchanged for gold at the central banks. This also implied that the exchange rate towards other countries participating in the gold standard was fixed. For instance, one US dollar cost 4.20 Mark.With the outbreak of the First World War, the gold standard was abandoned. As a consequence, the value of banknotes no longer had a reliable anchor. Hyperinflation occurred in 1922 and 1923, as more and more money was printed to finance public expenditure. Thus, by 1923 one US dollar cost around 4.2 billion Mark. Distrust, despair and desolation were the consequences in Germany, thereby undermining fundamental democratic principles and ultimately preparing the ground for the Second World War.To avoid a repetition of the hyperinflation of the interwar years, the Deutsche Bundesbank was granted a high degree of independence following the Second World War. Over the 50 years or so of the Deutsche Mark’s existence, annual consumer price inflation averaged 2.8%. A number of other countries experienced much higher inflation over this period, particularly in the 1970s and 1980s. Many Germans were therefore sceptical prior to the Deutsche Mark being replaced by the euro ten years ago. We now know that this scepticism was unfounded. So, in the first part of my speech, I will briefly describe the euro’s success in its first ten years. I will also explore the question of why lasting price stability is important, not only from an economic perspective, but also from a social perspective. I will then take a look at some of the key challenges we are currently facing and try to draw some initial lessons from the current financial crisis. I would also like to consider where we in Europe might be today if we did not have the euro.Ten years ago, on 1 January 1999, the euro was introduced as the common currency of 11 Member States of the European Union. This was a unique step following many years of thorough preparation. Now the euro is used by around 330 million citizens in 16 countries. It has established itself as a stable currency, accepted in financial markets worldwide. Looking at the inflation performance over the first decade of Monetary Union, the ECB has fulfilled its mandate under the Maastricht Treaty, which is to maintain price stability for the euro area as a whole.With inflation averaging slightly more than 2% during this period, the euro area has witnessed a decade of stable prices. This contrasts sharply with the fears that prevailed before the introduction of the euro, in particular in Germany, that the euro would be less stable than the Deutsche Mark and that the newly established, supranational ECB would not be in a position to deliver on its promise to keep prices stable. In fact, in its first decade the euro has, on average, been as stable as the Deutsche Mark was in the 1990s.The euro’s success is even more remarkable if one takes into account the number of price shocks during the past ten years, notably the continuous increase in oil prices between 1999 and mid-2008. Over this period crude oil prices rose from around USD 10 per barrel in 1999 to a peak of almost USD 150 per barrel in 2008, and there were also substantial rises in international food prices. Likewise, on the domestic side, we have witnessed almost regular increases in indirect taxes and important administered prices in most member countries of the euro area over the first ten years. As illustrated by Chart 1, the inflation performance of the euro area compares very favourably with that of the period leading up to 1999. [Chart 1: Inflation rates before and after the introduction of the euro]Longer-term inflation expectations have also been well anchored during the last ten years, at levels in line with price stability. Chart 2 illustrates various measures of inflation expectations, both based on surveys and derived from market expectations. All measures indicate that inflation expectations are relatively close to the Governing Council of the ECB’s target of keeping annual inflation rates below, but close to, 2%. This means that market participants trust the ECB to continue to deliver on its mandate of maintaining price stability over the medium term, reflecting, in particular, the smooth functioning and the credibility of the ECB’s monetary policy.[Chart 2: Various measures of inflation expectations]Firm anchoring of inflation expectations is essential for solid economic growth, job creation and the cultivation of trust regarding asset formation and savings. Low rates of inflation, together with well-anchored inflation expectations, have resulted in nominal and real interest rates across the euro area that have been low by both historical and international standards. Low interest rates and the associated low borrowing costs have had positive effects on investment and employment in the euro area. Such a favourable outcome in terms of price stability, the credibility of monetary policy and institutional robustness had not been expected by many critics of the euro prior to the creation of Monetary Union. In particular, it was constantly argued that the ECB’s single monetary policy could cause problems because a uniform approach in the form of a single monetary policy would not do justice to all the countries of the euro area, given the existing economic and structural differences. They argued that it would be too restrictive for countries with low levels of growth and too loose for countries with high levels of growth, and counterproductive in any case. It was also argued that national fiscal policies would be incompatible with the single monetary policy conducted by a supranational central bank. Finally, from an institutional point of view, there were doubts whether the presidents and national central bank governors in the Governing Council of the ECB would be able to act in a truly European spirit, rather than in the national interests of their respective countries.But, ten years on, measured against the achievements in terms of monetary policy, credibility and price stability, there is widespread agreement that the euro has performed very well. In fact, none of the above-mentioned fears have materialised. This is tangible proof of the robustness of the Eurosystem (the ECB and the national central banks of the euro area countries), and of the fact that the ECB’s monetary policy decisions are based on shared values and common principles. The Austrian economist Joseph A. Schumpeter stated that “a nation’s monetary system is a reflection of everything that the nation wants, suffers, and is. … Nothing says what a nation is made of so clearly as what it does in terms of its monetary policy.” Allow me, therefore, to briefly explain why it is so important to maintain price stability over the medium term and then I will present the main benefits of lasting price stability. First of all, price stability fosters trust in money and in property rights more generally. In particular, it preserves the purchasing power of money and protects the real value of income and wealth. Price stability is also important for the weakest groups in society, who suffer most from high and volatile inflation rates. As a consequence, maintaining price stability also contributes to social cohesion.Price stability is a precondition for sustainable growth and job creation. Prices can generally be seen as the traffic lights of the economy. A higher price is a signal for the producer of a good to continue or increase production. It signals a change in the relative scarcity of the individual good, compared with other goods. Similarly, a low price tells the producer to reduce or halt production. Without price stability, however, prices lose their signalling function, as it is no longer clear whether a change in price is due to a change in the relative scarcity of the individual good or caused by a change in the general price level. With high, volatile inflation, it becomes more difficult to distinguish between the two causes and it is more complicated for producers to know whether they should increase production or not. Furthermore, price stability over the medium term reduces risk for investors, which contributes to lower interest rates. This makes investment projects more profitable, which again leads to higher levels of employment and economic growth. The past decade is also testament to the fact that price stability goes hand in hand with economic growth and job creation. In the first ten years of Europe’s single currency, the number of people employed in the euro area has risen by approximately 18 million, which is equivalent to an annual increase of nearly 1.3% (see Chart 3). This compares favourably with the 1990s, when fewer than 8 million jobs were created, corresponding to an average annual increase over this period of 0.6%. Price stability was of course not solely responsible for this; changes in employment patterns are affected by many factors. However, these developments strongly confirm that a monetary policy oriented towards price stability is fully compatible with job creation. Price stability helps to ensure that necessary corporate restructuring does not get left on the backburner and also fosters wage differentiation across sectors, regions and qualifications, with positive effects on economic growth and employment.[Chart 3: Employment]At the same time, the euro has made an important contribution to economic and financial integration within Europe. The single currency has enhanced our ability to take advantage of the single market, and trade and capital ties between euro area countries have grown significantly. For example, cross-border trade in goods and services in the euro area has increased by 10 percentage points as a share of GDP since the introduction of the single currency (see Chart 4). Trade between individual euro area countries now accounts for about half of their total imports and exports. At the same time, trade with countries outside the euro area has also developed very dynamically. [Chart 4: Trade between euro area countries] The euro has promoted competition, price transparency and price convergence. It has lowered transaction costs and eliminated exchange rate risk.The euro has boosted direct investment within the euro area. Mergers and acquisitions in the euro area have also risen noticeably.In addition, the euro has made a significant contribution to the integration of financial markets in Europe. One example of this is the marked increase in cross-border investment in securities within the euro area, as illustrated by Chart 5. [Chart 5: Cross-border holdings as a share of total holdings of short-term debt securities issued in the euro area]Let me now turn to the ongoing financial market turbulence and its implications. Since August 2007 the global financial markets have experienced extensive corrective realignments. The repercussions of the turbulence were initially visible in the financial market in the form of dramatic increases in risk premia and increased volatility in interest rate movements. Thereafter, upheaval on the financial market led to a severe and synchronised economic downturn across the globe, the deepest since the beginning of the Great Depression in 1929. The current crisis, therefore, poses grave challenges to the financial industry and central bank community, as well as to supervisory and regulatory authorities and national governments. The outbreak of the financial market turbulence was not entirely unexpected, however. Both the ECB and other institutions had warned of macroeconomic imbalances and systematic undervaluation of risks in the years leading up to the crisis. Those years were characterised by an extended period of low interest rates, low inflation and sustained economic growth, both globally and within the euro area. At the same time, liquidity was abundant and default risks were considered by many to be very low. This environment strengthened investors’ risk appetite. In particular, with financial market participants expecting this environment to continue for quite some time, risks were systematically underestimated and the search for ever higher yields intensified. As a result, commercial banks readily granted credit for house purchases to households that otherwise could not have afforded it, and without adequately assessing their creditworthiness or credit default risk. At the same time, in an attempt to achieve higher yields, a number of innovative and increasingly complex financial products were offered, particularly in the United States. One prominent example of this was the bundling of mortgages in new and highly complex financial products and their resale as new securities to third parties via global financial markets. Bundling mortgages and distributing them was supposed to spread the overall risk. But this did not work as it was intended to. On the contrary, as the risk was ultimately transferred to a third party, the relevant incentives were not in place for the loan providers to make sure that the borrowers would be able to repay those loans. At the same time, many of those that ended up bearing the risk underestimated the extent of that risk. It eventually became evident that this practice was viable only as long as house prices in the United States continued to increase. When the many years of increases in house prices came to an end and house prices started to fall, problems soon emerged, including in the euro area, as banks here were among the buyers of these securities. Investors suddenly began to doubt the quality of their assets. This led to a sharp correction in prices on the financial markets, accompanied by a withdrawal of funds from the markets, leading to corresponding liquidity shortages for banks.Problems first emerged at the short end of the money market, where banks borrow from and lend to each other. Normally, the rates in this segment of the money market are close to the key interest rates set by central banks. Chart 6 shows the spread between the expected central bank rates and the market rates. As you can see, in August 2007 there was a sudden jump in the spread between these rates. This reflects the fact that banks became unwilling to lend to each other because they feared that the other bank would not be able to repay the loan. In order to obtain a loan, banks had to pay higher interest rates to compensate for the increased risk. You can also see that the spread widened dramatically in September last year in the wake of the collapse of Lehman Brothers. However, the spread has declined significantly in recent months, although it is still far above the levels that prevailed prior to the financial market turbulence.[Chart 6: Spreads in the money market]The banking sector has been facing significant challenges since financial market tensions intensified. For instance, the declared cumulative write-downs and credit market losses of European banks amount to almost USD 360 billion so far, or about EUR 270 billion. These problems have played a decisive role in the subdued lending to companies and households in the euro area. This is, on the one hand, due to the cutback in debt capital positions on banks’ balance sheets and the general tightening of credit standards. On the other hand, the demand for loans has fallen as a result of the overall weakening of economic activity. Developments in borrowing and lending have an impact on the real economy in that they play a particularly decisive role in trends in investment activity. From the very beginning of the crisis, the ECB has acted in a decisive and appropriate manner. It has taken a number of measures unprecedented in nature, scope and timing. The ECB has provided an extremely large amount of liquidity support to banks. In fact, when tensions first emerged in August 2007 the ECB was the first central bank worldwide to respond. By making changes to its operational framework, the ECB made sure that all solvent banks would have sufficient access to funding. When the crisis intensified in September last year, we introduced a number of new measures. Most importantly, we provided banks with unlimited access to liquidity at fixed rates for up to six months. The ECB also expanded its list of assets eligible for use as collateral in the Eurosystem’s credit operations. As a result of these new measures, the size of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet has expanded by a substantial EUR 600 billion and now stands at 16% of GDP, compared with 10% in mid-2007, with some volatility over that period. This mainly reflects the expansion of the provision of liquidity to the banking system, which plays a crucial role in the funding of the euro area economy. In other major economic regions, funding via debt securities, which has suffered more severe disruption, is of greater importance. In this respect, all the unconventional liquidity measures taken by the ECB have been tailored to the needs of the euro area. Notably, they have eased banks’ balance sheet constraints and thereby certainly helped to avoid a sudden collapse in the supply of credit and the emergence of a systemic crisis. In line with the substantial weakening of global demand and economic activity, inflationary pressures and risks have been diminishing. As a result, the ECB’s policy rates have been cut by 3 percentage points since the intensification of the crisis last October. These rate reductions, together with the liquidity management measures, have had a significant impact on money market interest rates. Since last October overnight money market rates have fallen even more steeply than the ECB’s policy rates. Money market rates in the euro area have now reached very low levels by international standards. Lower money market rates have also led to lower interest rates for private households and firms, although the decline in money market rates has so far been greater than the decline in interest rates on credit for households and firms. The fiscal authorities in the euro area have also demonstrated their capacity to react rapidly to exceptional circumstances. In a coordinated effort, the national governments of the euro area have provided support to the banking system, most notably through recapitalisation and guarantees for liabilities and assets. The funds provided under the package announced to stabilise the financial sector through these types of measure amount to 23% of the euro area’s GDP. The overall fiscal stimulus – through discretionary policy measures and the effect of automatic stabilisers – amounts to 3.6 percentage points of GDP for 2009 and 2010. All of these measures were necessary to support the functioning of the financial system, but they also imply a considerable fiscal burden in that fiscal debt and deficit ratios may increase substantially. In fact, what matters is not only the size of the fiscal stimulus, but also the potential to enhance confidence and effectiveness. While the fiscal measures introduced by euro area governments during the crisis have succeeded in cushioning the adverse impact of the crisis on the economy, it remains essential that countries return to sound fiscal policies and thereby, in a credible manner, stick to their commitment to respect the provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact. Overall, during the ongoing financial market turbulence, the euro area and the EU as a whole have proved their capacity to act decisively and promptly under difficult circumstances. National measures have been coordinated in a pragmatic manner with a view to enhancing their effectiveness through mutual reinforcement. The current financial crisis has pointed to a number of weaknesses that need to be addressed if we are to avoid a similar crisis in the future. Some weaknesses are rooted in the current design of the international financial system. This is particularly true with regard to the lack of transparency and accountability within the financial system. In this respect, much relies on financial players themselves taking responsibility for evaluating risk more effectively and increasing transparency as regards risk. In addition, various initiatives at national, European and international level aim, in particular, to improve the robustness of the financial system. Two recent reports – the Turner Report, written by Lord Turner, Chairman of the British Financial Services Authority, and a report by a high-ranking group of experts on financial supervision, led by Jacques de Larosière, former Governor of the Banque de France and former Managing Director of the IMF – contain a range of valuable reform recommendations. In addition, a group of experts recently provided a fitting analysis of the shortcomings of the current financial system in a report on the future of the banking sector in the Netherlands. [1] I would like to highlight three areas where I think change is necessary: there needs to be an increase in transparency, a dampening of pro-cyclicality and an improvement in institutional design in the field of financial supervision and regulation. First, the financial sector needs to become more transparent. It is quite striking that, despite the regulatory advances and the progress of information technology in recent decades, some financial market segments have been characterised by products that have proven to be hard for investors – never mind rating agencies, supervisors and regulators – to understand and value. One possibility here would be to standardise products and transactions and to ensure that transactions take place via regulated exchanges or clearing houses. Furthermore, all systemically important institutions, markets and instruments should be subject to an appropriate degree of regulation and oversight. One such example is the market for derivatives. For most of these financial contracts, the conditions are agreed upon between the two parties and the instruments are traded “over the counter"". Trading activities on this “OTC derivatives market” are subject to much less regulation than those on markets for products traded on the stock exchange, and the post-trading infrastructure is also less developed. Given the systemic relevance of these markets, the ECB supports the swift development of improved post-trading infrastructures, so as to enable more effective management of credit and operational risk, as well as to improve the transparency of these markets.Second, in my view, we need to try to dampen the excessive pro-cyclicality of the financial system. By this I mean that it typically becomes much easier to acquire funding during booms, whereas credit standards are normally tightened during economic downturns. In the same vein, investment risks are typically systematically underestimated in good times, whereas they tend to be overestimated in times of crisis. In this way, the financial system stimulates the booms and exacerbates economic downturns. This is exactly what we have been witnessing in the course of the current crisis. Ideally, we would want a financial system that worked the other way around, thus dampening booms and providing a stimulus for stabilisation during economic downturns. Some first steps have already been taken towards counteracting the pro-cyclical effects of supervisory regulations. Discussions are currently underway regarding changes to equity capital regulations and reporting in the area of risk provision. In addition, the introduction of a borrowing limit or leverage ratio is being considered. These measures all aim to reduce pro-cyclicality in the financial system and improve its stability.A third lesson we can draw from the current crisis is that it is necessary to take a more system-wide approach to financial market regulation and supervision. It is not enough to ensure that individual financial institutions are solid. Greater emphasis must be placed on the stability of the financial system as a whole – not least the cross-border links between the various components of the financial system. The de Larosière group proposed giving the ECB more responsibility within this field (i.e. that of macro-prudential supervision) by establishing a European Systemic Risk Council under the auspices of the ECB. The main tasks of this new Council would be to pool and analyse information, monitor relevant developments, make recommendations on macro-prudential policy and issue risk warnings.The ECB welcomes this proposal. The establishment of a European Systemic Risk Council should substantially improve the assessment of risks to financial stability at the EU level. In order for the new Council to perform its tasks in an optimal manner, three requirements must be fulfilled. First, the ECB must have timely access to the relevant information, including information concerning individual institutions. Second, risk warnings from the new Council should be translated into effective policy action. And third, for the new Council to be independent and effective in its decision-making, it is essential that it have a solid institutional and legal basis. I also think the current crisis holds some lessons for monetary policy. The crisis has shown us that a stable financial system is a prerequisite for price stability. Everyone is agreed that each central bank has one instrument at its disposal, namely monetary policy, to achieve its goal of price stability. However, not all are agreed on which prices a central bank should be concerned about.The extent to which monetary policy should take asset prices into account has been a long-standing debate among central bankers and academic economists. The ECB’s definition of price stability identifies a specific price index – namely the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) – as the one to be used for assessing whether price stability has been achieved. As the HICP is a consumer price index, asset prices such as house prices or stock prices are not included. This does not mean that asset prices are not important from a monetary policy perspective. To the extent that changes in asset prices have an impact on the outlook for prices, a central bank that aims to maintain price stability will need to respond to these changes. One could argue that asset prices should play a greater role in monetary policy considerations. According to this school of thought, as the build-up of an asset price bubble might have severe economic consequences in the longer term, central banks should try to deal with the bubble pre-emptively. To put this in more concrete terms, it is argued that the central bank should increase interest rates when asset price inflation reaches a certain level, even if the impact of this inflation on the outlook for consumer prices is not obvious. In academic literature, this approach is often referred to as “leaning against the wind”.Taking asset prices into account may pose problems. However, monetary policy-makers should try to mitigate the risk of the build-up of a bubble by being aware of the effects their policy decisions can have on the financial system.The ECB’s assessment of risks to price stability is based on a comprehensive economic and monetary analysis, known as its “two-pillar strategy”. The first pillar, economic analysis, is common to most central banks. It basically consists of identifying risks to price stability in the short to medium term by analysing the interplay between aggregate supply and aggregate demand in the economy. The analysis includes the study of the interaction between a number of macroeconomic and financial variables. The variables we look at include, just to name a few, aggregate output, private consumption, investment, fiscal policy, capital and labour market conditions, different price and cost indicators, the exchange rate, the global economy, the balance of payments and financial markets.The second pillar, monetary analysis, is given a prominent role at the ECB. Analysing developments in borrowing and lending, particularly loans to the private sector, is helpful in extracting the relevant signals from monetary developments. This analysis also fosters the regular monitoring of asset price developments and their implications. Consideration of these aspects must become more extensive and systematic in the future. Strengthening the ECB’s role in financial supervision should contribute to ensuring that proper consideration is given to the possible build-up of financial imbalances when making monetary policy decisions. The current crisis has demonstrated that risks to financial stability are accompanied by risks to price stability. Central banks must give even greater consideration to these risks in their analyses.As mentioned, the euro was very succesful in its first ten years. But it is clear that the current economic crisis represents the greatest challenge for the euro so far.Let’s be realistic: 2009 will be a difficult year. According to the most recent macroeconomic projections by ECB staff, published in March of this year, the euro area economy is expected to contract by between 2.2% and 3.2% in 2009. Since then, other international institutions have published even more pessimistic forecasts. According to the forecast by the European Commission, for example, the economy is expected to shrink by 4% this year. This means, among other things, fewer jobs, higher unemployment, less investment and fewer exports. 2009 will be a year of necessary adjustments for banks, firms and private households, but these adjustments will lay the foundations for a return to more stable and improved economic conditions.That said, we should not forget how Europe would look today without the euro. In addition to the financial market turbulence, the problems in the financial sector and the economic downturn, we would be facing potentially large fluctuations between Europe’s national currencies.[Chart 7: Real effective exchange rates]The currencies of some of the countries outside the euro area have experienced considerable fluctuations during the current crisis, as illustrated in Chart 7. Both the Swedish krona and the pound sterling have declined substantially in value since September 2008 and some of the most recent countries to join the EU have seen even larger fluctuations in their currency’s purchasing power. This is an additional source of uncertainty for these countries. The current turmoil has also confirmed an advantage the euro has, namely that, in stormy seas, it is better to be aboard a large ship than a small boat. The euro has had a very important stabilising effect in difficult times.The many benefits of the euro under the current circumstances are also highlighted by the fact that many central and eastern European countries have expressed a wish to join the euro area as quickly as possible. This is no surprise, given that many countries have already made progress towards adopting the euro. Nevertheless, all countries must first fulfil all of the relevant criteria before they may join the euro area. I would like to emphasise that the euro area is not a closed shop. Five new countries have joined since the start of Monetary Union in January 1999, with Slovakia becoming the newest member of the euro area in January of this year. The door is open to all those that meet the clearly stated and predefined criteria for membership of the Economic and Monetary Union.As the saying goes, “the proof of the pudding is in the eating”. The last ten years are evidence of the fact that the euro has made a significant contribution to a stronger and more integrated Europe. The single currency has created an environment where price stability is king. The euro has also proved itself in the current financial market crisis. Thanks to the broad availability of euro liquidity, the currency has facilitated the stabilisation of the financial system. The financial crisis has posed huge challenges for financial market participants, governments and central banks. In order to be able to deal with these better in the future, we must pay particular attention to three lessons learnt from the current crisis. First, we need to pay more attention to considerations regarding financial stability and systemic risk. This is also essential in the overall assessment of the risks to price stability over the medium term and in respect of the ECB’s conduct of monetary policy. The ECB’s involvement in macro-prudential supervision within the proposed European Systemic Risk Council will be a welcome step in this direction.Second, pro-cyclicality within the financial system must be restricted. In this regard, it will be crucial to come up with appropriate regulatory tools to effectively smooth out business cycle fluctuations.Third, there must be an improvement in regulation and oversight. In this respect, all systemically important institutions, markets and instruments should be subject to an appropriate degree of regulation and oversight. For example, the ECB supports initiatives to swiftly establish infrastructures for systemically relevant markets such as the OTC derivatives markets. The biggest challenge we now face is the need to reform the financial sector in a way which benefits the real economy, pulls us quickly out of the crisis and combats potential risks to price stability. Over the last ten years we have been successful in achieving the last of these things and we intend this to continue in the future.[1] Advisory Committee on the Future of Banks in the Netherlands (2009): Restoring trust. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",professor krämer agre today meet one year ago discuss took place backdrop first nine month financi market turbul central bank react provid bank addit fund form reserv particular stabilis money market today one year addit challeng ad face m therefor happi opportun karlsruh today talk current challeng relat monetari polici experi first ten year euro pleasur speak hochschul karlsruh sinc foundat name großherzoglich badisch baugewerkeschul websit inform becom popular univers germani recruit nineteenth centuri univers still oper origin name offici mean payment mark germani adopt gold standard currenc arrang countri set valu currenc relat gold coin made gold banknot could exchang gold central bank also impli exchang rate toward countri particip gold standard fix instanc one us dollar cost mark outbreak first world war gold standard abandon consequ valu banknot longer reliabl anchor hyperinfl occur money print financ public expenditur thus one us dollar cost around billion mark distrust despair desol consequ germani therebi undermin fundament democrat principl ultim prepar ground second world war avoid repetit hyperinfl interwar year deutsch bundesbank grant high degre independ follow second world war year deutsch mark exist annual consum price inflat averag number countri experienc much higher inflat period particular mani german therefor sceptic prior deutsch mark replac euro ten year ago know sceptic unfound first part speech briefli describ euro success first ten year also explor question last price stabil import econom perspect also social perspect take look key challeng current face tri draw initi lesson current financi crisi would also like consid europ might today euro ten year ago januari euro introduc common currenc member state european union uniqu step follow mani year thorough prepar euro use around million citizen countri establish stabl currenc accept financi market worldwid look inflat perform first decad monetari union ecb fulfil mandat maastricht treati maintain price stabil euro area whole inflat averag slight period euro area wit decad stabl price contrast sharpli fear prevail introduct euro particular germani euro would less stabl deutsch mark newli establish supran ecb would posit deliv promis keep price stabl fact first decad euro averag stabl deutsch mark euro success even remark one take account number price shock past ten year notabl continu increas oil price mid period crude oil price rose around usd per barrel peak almost usd per barrel also substanti rise intern food price likewis domest side wit almost regular increas indirect tax import administ price member countri euro area first ten year illustr chart inflat perform euro area compar favour period lead chart inflat rate introduct euro longerterm inflat expect also well anchor last ten year level line price stabil chart illustr various measur inflat expect base survey deriv market expect measur indic inflat expect relat close govern council ecb target keep annual inflat rate close mean market particip trust ecb continu deliv mandat maintain price stabil medium term reflect particular smooth function credibl ecb monetari polici chart various measur inflat expect firm anchor inflat expect essenti solid econom growth job creation cultiv trust regard asset format save low rate inflat togeth wellanchor inflat expect result nomin real interest rate across euro area low histor intern standard low interest rate associ low borrow cost posit effect invest employ euro area favour outcom term price stabil credibl monetari polici institut robust expect mani critic euro prior creation monetari union particular constant argu ecb singl monetari polici could caus problem uniform approach form singl monetari polici would justic countri euro area given exist econom structur differ argu would restrict countri low level growth loos countri high level growth counterproduct case also argu nation fiscal polici would incompat singl monetari polici conduct supran central bank final institut point view doubt whether presid nation central bank governor govern council ecb would abl act truli european spirit rather nation interest respect countri ten year measur achiev term monetari polici credibl price stabil widespread agreement euro perform well fact none abovement fear materialis tangibl proof robust eurosystem ecb nation central bank euro area countri fact ecb monetari polici decis base share valu common principl austrian economist schumpet state nation monetari system reflect everyth nation want suffer noth say nation made clear term monetari polici allow therefor briefli explain import maintain price stabil medium term present main benefit last price stabil first price stabil foster trust money properti right general particular preserv purchas power money protect real valu incom wealth price stabil also import weakest group societi suffer high volatil inflat rate consequ maintain price stabil also contribut social cohes price stabil precondit sustain growth job creation price general seen traffic light economi higher price signal produc good continu increas product signal chang relat scarciti individu good compar good similar low price tell produc reduc halt product without price stabil howev price lose signal function longer clear whether chang price due chang relat scarciti individu good caus chang general price level high volatil inflat becom difficult distinguish two caus complic produc know whether increas product furthermor price stabil medium term reduc risk investor contribut lower interest rate make invest project profit lead higher level employ econom growth past decad also testament fact price stabil goe hand hand econom growth job creation first ten year europ singl currenc number peopl employ euro area risen approxim million equival annual increas near see chart compar favour fewer million job creat correspond averag annual increas period price stabil cours sole respons chang employ pattern affect mani factor howev develop strong confirm monetari polici orient toward price stabil fulli compat job creation price stabil help ensur necessari corpor restructur get left backburn also foster wage differenti across sector region qualif posit effect econom growth employ chart employ time euro made import contribut econom financi integr within europ singl currenc enhanc abil take advantag singl market trade capit tie euro area countri grown signific exampl crossbord trade good servic euro area increas percentag point share gdp sinc introduct singl currenc see chart trade individu euro area countri account half total import export time trade countri outsid euro area also develop dynam chart trade euro area countri euro promot competit price transpar price converg lower transact cost elimin exchang rate risk euro boost direct invest within euro area merger acquisit euro area also risen notic addit euro made signific contribut integr financi market europ one exampl mark increas crossbord invest secur within euro area illustr chart chart crossbord hold share total hold shortterm debt secur issu euro area let turn ongo financi market turbul implic sinc august global financi market experienc extens correct realign repercuss turbul initi visibl financi market form dramat increas risk premia increas volatil interest rate movement thereaft upheav financi market led sever synchronis econom downturn across globe deepest sinc begin great depress current crisi therefor pose grave challeng financi industri central bank communiti well supervisori regulatori author nation govern outbreak financi market turbul entir unexpect howev ecb institut warn macroeconom imbal systemat undervalu risk year lead crisi year characteris extend period low interest rate low inflat sustain econom growth global within euro area time liquid abund default risk consid mani low environ strengthen investor risk appetit particular financi market particip expect environ continu quit time risk systemat underestim search ever higher yield intensifi result commerci bank readili grant credit hous purchas household otherwis could afford without adequ assess creditworthi credit default risk time attempt achiev higher yield number innov increas complex financi product offer particular unit state one promin exampl bundl mortgag new high complex financi product resal new secur third parti via global financi market bundl mortgag distribut suppos spread overal risk work intend contrari risk ultim transfer third parti relev incent place loan provid make sure borrow would abl repay loan time mani end bear risk underestim extent risk eventu becam evid practic viabl long hous price unit state continu increas mani year increas hous price came end hous price start fall problem soon emerg includ euro area bank among buyer secur investor sudden began doubt qualiti asset led sharp correct price financi market accompani withdraw fund market lead correspond liquid shortag bank problem first emerg short end money market bank borrow lend normal rate segment money market close key interest rate set central bank chart show spread expect central bank rate market rate see august sudden jump spread rate reflect fact bank becam unwil lend fear bank would abl repay loan order obtain loan bank pay higher interest rate compens increas risk also see spread widen dramat septemb last year wake collaps lehman brother howev spread declin signific recent month although still far level prevail prior financi market turbul chart spread money market bank sector face signific challeng sinc financi market tension intensifi instanc declar cumul writedown credit market loss european bank amount almost usd billion far eur billion problem play decis role subdu lend compani household euro area one hand due cutback debt capit posit bank balanc sheet general tighten credit standard hand demand loan fallen result overal weaken econom activ develop borrow lend impact real economi play particular decis role trend invest activ begin crisi ecb act decis appropri manner taken number measur unpreced natur scope time ecb provid extrem larg amount liquid support bank fact tension first emerg august ecb first central bank worldwid respond make chang oper framework ecb made sure solvent bank would suffici access fund crisi intensifi septemb last year introduc number new measur import provid bank unlimit access liquid fix rate six month ecb also expand list asset elig use collater eurosystem credit oper result new measur size eurosystem balanc sheet expand substanti eur billion stand gdp compar mid volatil period main reflect expans provis liquid bank system play crucial role fund euro area economi major econom region fund via debt secur suffer sever disrupt greater import respect unconvent liquid measur taken ecb tailor need euro area notabl eas bank balanc sheet constraint therebi certain help avoid sudden collaps suppli credit emerg system crisi line substanti weaken global demand econom activ inflationari pressur risk diminish result ecb polici rate cut percentag point sinc intensif crisi last octob rate reduct togeth liquid manag measur signific impact money market interest rate sinc last octob overnight money market rate fallen even steepli ecb polici rate money market rate euro area reach low level intern standard lower money market rate also led lower interest rate privat household firm although declin money market rate far greater declin interest rate credit household firm fiscal author euro area also demonstr capac react rapid except circumst coordin effort nation govern euro area provid support bank system notabl recapitalis guarante liabil asset fund provid packag announc stabilis financi sector type measur amount euro area gdp overal fiscal stimulus discretionari polici measur effect automat stabilis amount percentag point gdp measur necessari support function financi system also impli consider fiscal burden fiscal debt deficit ratio may increas substanti fact matter size fiscal stimulus also potenti enhanc confid effect fiscal measur introduc euro area govern crisi succeed cushion advers impact crisi economi remain essenti countri return sound fiscal polici therebi credibl manner stick commit respect provis stabil growth pact overal ongo financi market turbul euro area eu whole prove capac act decis prompt difficult circumst nation measur coordin pragmat manner view enhanc effect mutual reinforc current financi crisi point number weak need address avoid similar crisi futur weak root current design intern financi system particular true regard lack transpar account within financi system respect much reli financi player take respons evalu risk effect increas transpar regard risk addit various initi nation european intern level aim particular improv robust financi system two recent report turner report written lord turner chairman british financi servic author report highrank group expert financi supervis led jacqu de larosièr former governor banqu de franc former manag director imf contain rang valuabl reform recommend addit group expert recent provid fit analysi shortcom current financi system report futur bank sector netherland would like highlight three area think chang necessari need increas transpar dampen procycl improv institut design field financi supervis regul first financi sector need becom transpar quit strike despit regulatori advanc progress inform technolog recent decad financi market segment characteris product proven hard investor never mind rate agenc supervisor regul understand valu one possibl would standardis product transact ensur transact take place via regul exchang clear hous furthermor system import institut market instrument subject appropri degre regul oversight one exampl market deriv financi contract condit agre upon two parti instrument trade counter trade activ otc deriv market subject much less regul market product trade stock exchang posttrad infrastructur also less develop given system relev market ecb support swift develop improv posttrad infrastructur enabl effect manag credit oper risk well improv transpar market second view need tri dampen excess procycl financi system mean typic becom much easier acquir fund boom wherea credit standard normal tighten econom downturn vein invest risk typic systemat underestim good time wherea tend overestim time crisi way financi system stimul boom exacerb econom downturn exact wit cours current crisi ideal would want financi system work way around thus dampen boom provid stimulus stabilis econom downturn first step alreadi taken toward counteract procycl effect supervisori regul discuss current underway regard chang equiti capit regul report area risk provis addit introduct borrow limit leverag ratio consid measur aim reduc procycl financi system improv stabil third lesson draw current crisi necessari take systemwid approach financi market regul supervis enough ensur individu financi institut solid greater emphasi must place stabil financi system whole least crossbord link various compon financi system de larosièr group propos give ecb respons within field e macroprudenti supervis establish european system risk council auspic ecb main task new council would pool analys inform monitor relev develop make recommend macroprudenti polici issu risk warn ecb welcom propos establish european system risk council substanti improv assess risk financi stabil eu level order new council perform task optim manner three requir must fulfil first ecb must time access relev inform includ inform concern individu institut second risk warn new council translat effect polici action third new council independ effect decisionmak essenti solid institut legal basi also think current crisi hold lesson monetari polici crisi shown us stabl financi system prerequisit price stabil everyon agre central bank one instrument dispos name monetari polici achiev goal price stabil howev agre price central bank concern extent monetari polici take asset price account longstand debat among central banker academ economist ecb definit price stabil identifi specif price index name harmonis index consum price hicp one use assess whether price stabil achiev hicp consum price index asset price hous price stock price includ mean asset price import monetari polici perspect extent chang asset price impact outlook price central bank aim maintain price stabil need respond chang one could argu asset price play greater role monetari polici consider accord school thought buildup asset price bubbl might sever econom consequ longer term central bank tri deal bubbl preemptiv put concret term argu central bank increas interest rate asset price inflat reach certain level even impact inflat outlook consum price obvious academ literatur approach often refer lean wind take asset price account may pose problem howev monetari policymak tri mitig risk buildup bubbl awar effect polici decis financi system ecb assess risk price stabil base comprehens econom monetari analysi known twopillar strategi first pillar econom analysi common central bank basic consist identifi risk price stabil short medium term analys interplay aggreg suppli aggreg demand economi analysi includ studi interact number macroeconom financi variabl variabl look includ name aggreg output privat consumpt invest fiscal polici capit labour market condit differ price cost indic exchang rate global economi balanc payment financi market second pillar monetari analysi given promin role ecb analys develop borrow lend particular loan privat sector help extract relev signal monetari develop analysi also foster regular monitor asset price develop implic consider aspect must becom extens systemat futur strengthen ecb role financi supervis contribut ensur proper consider given possibl buildup financi imbal make monetari polici decis current crisi demonstr risk financi stabil accompani risk price stabil central bank must give even greater consider risk analys mention euro succes first ten year clear current econom crisi repres greatest challeng euro far let realist difficult year accord recent macroeconom project ecb staff publish march year euro area economi expect contract sinc intern institut publish even pessimist forecast accord forecast european commiss exampl economi expect shrink year mean among thing fewer job higher unemploy less invest fewer export year necessari adjust bank firm privat household adjust lay foundat return stabl improv econom condit said forget europ would look today without euro addit financi market turbul problem financi sector econom downturn would face potenti larg fluctuat europ nation currenc chart real effect exchang rate currenc countri outsid euro area experienc consider fluctuat current crisi illustr chart swedish krona pound sterl declin substanti valu sinc septemb recent countri join eu seen even larger fluctuat currenc purchas power addit sourc uncertainti countri current turmoil also confirm advantag euro name stormi sea better aboard larg ship small boat euro import stabilis effect difficult time mani benefit euro current circumst also highlight fact mani central eastern european countri express wish join euro area quick possibl surpris given mani countri alreadi made progress toward adopt euro nevertheless countri must first fulfil relev criteria may join euro area would like emphasis euro area close shop five new countri join sinc start monetari union januari slovakia becom newest member euro area januari year door open meet clear state predefin criteria membership econom monetari union say goe proof pud eat last ten year evid fact euro made signific contribut stronger integr europ singl currenc creat environ price stabil king euro also prove current financi market crisi thank broad avail euro liquid currenc facilit stabilis financi system financi crisi pose huge challeng financi market particip govern central bank order abl deal better futur must pay particular attent three lesson learnt current crisi first need pay attent consider regard financi stabil system risk also essenti overal assess risk price stabil medium term respect ecb conduct monetari polici ecb involv macroprudenti supervis within propos european system risk council welcom step direct second procycl within financi system must restrict regard crucial come appropri regulatori tool effect smooth busi cycl fluctuat third must improv regul oversight respect system import institut market instrument subject appropri degre regul oversight exampl ecb support initi swift establish infrastructur system relev market otc deriv market biggest challeng face need reform financi sector way benefit real economi pull us quick crisi combat potenti risk price stabil last ten year success achiev last thing intend continu futur advisori committe futur bank netherland restor trust reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en