Benoît Cœuré: The relevance of household-level data for monetary policy and financial stability analysis,17-10-2013,European Central Bank,ECB,1697,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen [1],Welcome to the European Central Bank Conference on Household Finance and Consumption. This conference follows an important milestone in a project that the Eurosystem took up more than six years ago, the Household Finance and Consumption Survey (HFCS). The results from the first wave of the survey were published last April, and the microdata were made available to researchers interested in their use. The conference programme is a testimony to the potential that the HFCS has to enhance our understanding of the economic behaviour of individual households.Let me explain why the ECB decided to embark on this complex project. Now more than ever, after the recent financial crisis, it is clear that aggregate data do not always reveal the whole story. The same aggregate statistics can be the result of different underlying situations. In particular, micro-economic sub-structures may react differently when facing a shock or an economic policy intervention. Progress in economic theory and in empirical methods also highlights the usefulness of a more granular approach to macroeconomic outcomes.To be more precise, there are two areas of great importance for the ECB in which the use of household-level data can prove very useful: monetary policy and financial stability. Monetary policy interventions have distributional effects across the population depending on the composition of the assets and liabilities of households. One could argue that monetary policy is in essence distributional in the intertemporal dimension and the euro area crisis has uncovered distributional effects of monetary policy in the spatial dimension. Such effects are however unintended, or in other words, they are a means to an end, that is price stability. Central banks should steer away from distributional politics. But there can be a thin line between intended and unintended consequences, which makes it even more necessary to understand the cross-sectional effects of monetary policy interventions.Let me give you a few examples. The proportion of total assets invested in interest-bearing products and the proportion of liabilities subject to adjustable rates may to a large extent determine the response of a household’s future income and net wealth to a change in interest rates. We would like to know how homeowners vs. renters, poor vs. rich, employed vs. unemployed, would feel the impact of specific monetary policy interventions, and to what extent and how this affects the transmission to the aggregate economy. Moreover, since we operate in a monetary union, it is also important to measure and analyse the effects across the different Member States, which is only possible if homogeneous information is available for all of them. In addition, the survey can be used to estimate how inflation affects portfolios of various households, along the lines of Doepke and Schneider (2006) [1]. We are also interested in the implications of household financial positions for financial stability. For this purpose, the matching of assets and liabilities has to be done at the individual level. When monitoring the evolution of financial vulnerability ratios such as the debt service to income ratio, the debt to income ratio or the debt to asset ratio, aggregate figures may mask underlying problematic situations, such as pockets of households with unsustainable financial burdens which could lead to defaults and bank losses in case of an adverse macroeconomic scenario. In this vein, the data can be used for conducting micro-simulations as a policy tool. This is already done in other central banks such as those of Finland [2] or Sweden [3], which incorporate these simulations as part of their regular monitoring of the economy. As another example, the reasons for the accumulation of debt can be studied as in Mian and Sufi (2009) [4], who document that the expansion of mortgage credit in the US before the crisis occurred disproportionately in areas with declining relative income growth and led to a sharp increase in mortgage defaults later on.Going beyond these two direct policy applications, the HFCS offers researchers an invaluable tool to deepen our understanding of a wide variety of topics in the field of household finance. The first results of these efforts will already be presented in this conference. I would like to draw your attention to some of them. Household indebtedness has grown steadily in most developed countries in the last two decades, both in absolute terms and relative to household income [5], but the research on the causes and consequences of this indebtedness is limited to a few countries, mainly the US and the UK. We are now in a position to study which factors determine the debt holdings of euro area households, how is this debt distributed among them, what type of debt do households make use of and what is the effect of these holdings on spending.It is also important to study the portfolio of assets that households are holding. There is ample evidence that most households hold rather simple portfolios, composed basically of real estate and deposits [6]. However, the development of financial markets and the creation of new financial instruments have facilitated the diversification of households’ portfolios. Stock holdings have increased, mainly through the commercialisation of mutual funds and retirement accounts, and this has allowed more households to benefit from the equity premium. On the other hand, and in light of the problematic financial situation faced by many households during the recent financial crisis, more research will be needed to see whether financial innovation could have negative effects on some households and to what extent households are able to understand the risks they are exposed to, e.g. once house prices start to decline substantially. This goes hand in hand with the concept of financial literacy, another area of research which has attracted substantial attention lately, and which may become even more relevant an issue given the increasing trend towards private households managing their own pension wealth in the future [7]. As an example, one of the papers that will be presented in the conference studies the effects of exposure to financial training on the debt behaviour of young US consumers. Another advantage of survey data is the possibility of collecting information on households’ attitudes, beliefs and expectations. This allows researchers to establish a connection between behavioural traits and observed financial decisions. For example, in the HFCS, households are asked about the amount of risk they are willing to take on when making financial investments or whether over the next year they expect their income to go up more, less or about the same as prices. In the next couple of days we will listen to presentations on how gamblers manage their personal finances or how important are the presence of loss aversion and narrow framing, two of the most prominent aspects of prospect theory, for portfolio choice decisions.The study of household finance has much to say on the causes and consequences for the economy of the current financial crisis. The 2007 crisis, which originated in the US, is labelled the “sub-prime crisis”, and it is rooted in the excessive accumulation of debt by households which did not have the appropriate buffers to repay their debt in case of a negative shock. As policy-makers we should be deeply interested in knowing where the risks are concentrated in the household sector, how much of a threat they pose to other agents in the economy, which kind of shocks households are more vulnerable to. And should we, as policy-makers, worry about a house price decline, a rise in unemployment or a stock market bust? How exposed is consumer demand to declines in prices of different assets? How will financial losses of individual households impact on public finances? Tomorrow morning we will hear about some of these topics and in particular about the effect of macroeconomic experiences on households’ risk-taking behaviour and portfolio choice, the effect of credit supply shocks on asset allocation and the consumers’ demand for cash in an after-crisis scenario of low interest rates.The closing session of the conference will deal with the topic of cross-country wealth comparisons. Explaining household wealth differences across countries is not as easy as casual observers might think. There is a plethora of factors involved in the wealth accumulation process. Public comments on the first wave of the survey last April confirmed the usefulness of a careful analysis and explanation of cross-country wealth differences, as was done in the explanatory documents [8]. The papers which will be presented here will analyse the role of income, home ownership and house price dynamics, household structure and intergenerational transfers in this process of wealth accumulation.I hope the exchange of ideas that will take place in the next two days will help us to further our understanding of how households manage their finances in a complex and uncertain world, to draw useful policy lessons and prepare for the next waves of the survey. And I hope this conference will spur research in this exciting field, from which we all, researchers and policy-makers alike, have so much to learn.Thank you very much for your attention. [1] Doepke, Matthias and Martin Schneider (2006), “Inflation and the Redistribution of Nominal Wealth,” Journal of Political Economy, University of Chicago Press, vol. 114(6), pages 1069-1097, December.[2] Herrala R. and K. Kauko (2007), “Household loan loss risk in Finland – estimations and simulations with micro data”, Bank of Finland research discussion papers 5/2007.[3] Persson M. (2009), “Household indebtedness in Sweden and implications for financial stability – the use of household level data”, BIS Papers No 46.[4] Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi (2009), “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol. 124(4), pages 1449-1496, November. [5] Girouard, N., M. Kennedy and C. André (2006), “Has the Rise in Debt Made Households More Vulnerable?”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 535, OECD Publishing.[6] Guiso, L., M. Haliassos and T. Jappelli (2002), Household Portfolios, Cambridge: MIT Press.[7] Lusardi, A. (2010), “The importance of financial literacy”, Presentation to the Conference on Household Finance and Consumption, Luxembourg City, 25-26 October 2010.[8] Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Network (2013), “The Eurosystem Household Finance and Consumption Survey. Results from the First Wave”, Statistical Paper Series, No 2, April.[1]I wish to thank Miguel Ampudia for his contributions to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions expressed herein.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen welcom european central bank confer household financ consumpt confer follow import mileston project eurosystem took six year ago household financ consumpt survey hfcs result first wave survey publish last april microdata made avail research interest use confer programm testimoni potenti hfcs enhanc understand econom behaviour individu household let explain ecb decid embark complex project ever recent financi crisi clear aggreg data alway reveal whole stori aggreg statist result differ under situat particular microeconom substructur may react differ face shock econom polici intervent progress econom theori empir method also highlight use granular approach macroeconom outcom precis two area great import ecb use householdlevel data prove use monetari polici financi stabil monetari polici intervent distribut effect across popul depend composit asset liabil household one could argu monetari polici essenc distribut intertempor dimens euro area crisi uncov distribut effect monetari polici spatial dimens effect howev unintend word mean end price stabil central bank steer away distribut polit thin line intend unintend consequ make even necessari understand crosssect effect monetari polici intervent let give exampl proport total asset invest interestbear product proport liabil subject adjust rate may larg extent determin respons household futur incom net wealth chang interest rate would like know homeown vs renter poor vs rich employ vs unemploy would feel impact specif monetari polici intervent extent affect transmiss aggreg economi moreov sinc oper monetari union also import measur analys effect across differ member state possibl homogen inform avail addit survey use estim inflat affect portfolio various household along line doepk schneider also interest implic household financi posit financi stabil purpos match asset liabil done individu level monitor evolut financi vulner ratio debt servic incom ratio debt incom ratio debt asset ratio aggreg figur may mask under problemat situat pocket household unsustain financi burden could lead default bank loss case advers macroeconom scenario vein data use conduct microsimul polici tool alreadi done central bank finland sweden incorpor simul part regular monitor economi anoth exampl reason accumul debt studi mian sufi document expans mortgag credit us crisi occur disproportion area declin relat incom growth led sharp increas mortgag default later go beyond two direct polici applic hfcs offer research invalu tool deepen understand wide varieti topic field household financ first result effort alreadi present confer would like draw attent household indebted grown steadili develop countri last two decad absolut term relat household incom research caus consequ indebted limit countri main us uk posit studi factor determin debt hold euro area household debt distribut among type debt household make use effect hold spend also import studi portfolio asset household hold ampl evid household hold rather simpl portfolio compos basic real estat deposit howev develop financi market creation new financi instrument facilit diversif household portfolio stock hold increas main commercialis mutual fund retir account allow household benefit equiti premium hand light problemat financi situat face mani household recent financi crisi research need see whether financi innov could negat effect household extent household abl understand risk expos e g hous price start declin substanti goe hand hand concept financi literaci anoth area research attract substanti attent late may becom even relev issu given increas trend toward privat household manag pension wealth futur exampl one paper present confer studi effect exposur financi train debt behaviour young us consum anoth advantag survey data possibl collect inform household attitud belief expect allow research establish connect behaviour trait observ financi decis exampl hfcs household ask amount risk will take make financi invest whether next year expect incom go less price next coupl day listen present gambler manag person financ import presenc loss avers narrow frame two promin aspect prospect theori portfolio choic decis studi household financ much say caus consequ economi current financi crisi crisi origin us label subprim crisi root excess accumul debt household appropri buffer repay debt case negat shock policymak deepli interest know risk concentr household sector much threat pose agent economi kind shock household vulner policymak worri hous price declin rise unemploy stock market bust expos consum demand declin price differ asset financi loss individu household impact public financ tomorrow morn hear topic particular effect macroeconom experi household risktak behaviour portfolio choic effect credit suppli shock asset alloc consum demand cash aftercrisi scenario low interest rate close session confer deal topic crosscountri wealth comparison explain household wealth differ across countri easi casual observ might think plethora factor involv wealth accumul process public comment first wave survey last april confirm use care analysi explan crosscountri wealth differ done explanatori document paper present analys role incom home ownership hous price dynam household structur intergener transfer process wealth accumul hope exchang idea take place next two day help us understand household manag financ complex uncertain world draw use polici lesson prepar next wave survey hope confer spur research excit field research policymak alik much learn thank much attent doepk matthia schneider inflat redistribut nomin wealth journal polit economi univers chicago press vol page decemb herrala r k kauko household loan loss risk finland estim simul micro data bank finland research discuss paper persson m household indebted sweden implic financi stabil use household level data bis paper mian atif amir sufi consequ mortgag credit expans evid u mortgag default crisi quarter journal econom mit press vol page novemb girouard n m kennedi c andré rise debt made household vulner oecd econom depart work paper oecd publish guiso l m haliasso jappelli household portfolio cambridg mit press lusardi import financi literaci present confer household financ consumpt luxembourg citi octob eurosystem household financ consumpt network eurosystem household financ consumpt survey result first wave statist paper seri april wish thank miguel ampudia contribut speech remain sole respons opinion express herein reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en