Peter Praet: Japan and the EU in the global economy – challenges and opportunities,07-10-2013,European Central Bank,ECB,3909,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen, [1] It is a pleasure to be able to share some thoughts on the challenges and opportunities Japan and Europe are facing in the global economy. Since the beginning of the financial crisis, there has been no shortage of challenges along the road back to what I would call the “normal functioning” of our economies. One of the biggest challenges I see is still to be addressed: that of how to grow in an era of deleveraging. Deleveraging can occur in an orderly fashion or it can be chaotic. It may drag our economies down or it can place them on a stronger footing. Which of these will be the case depends to a large extent on how we manage the process.Today, I will focus my comments on the policy challenges faced by our two economies, especially as regards how to manage the deleveraging process in the euro area, keeping in mind the Japanese experience during the 1990s.As witnessed in Japan, protracted and large-scale balance sheet adjustments can weaken economic activity over a protracted period of time. Repairing the financial sector was an important element in improving the Japanese economy. The lesson for the euro area appears to be clear: the overhaul of the financial architecture – including the establishment of a procedure for resolving failing banks – needs to be accomplished in its entirety; selective mending will not be enough. In my view, we should make use of the momentum offered by the crisis to turn these challenges into opportunities – opportunities to put our economies on a sounder footing.To underscore why I think that we need to address today’s challenges in a comprehensive manner and why institutions are crucial in achieving this, I will first briefly review the build-up and adjustment of financial imbalances both in Japan and in Europe. Then I will elaborate on how to manage the deleveraging process and the institutional changes to be implemented, before touching upon the role monetary policy has to play.The Japanese experience provides important lessons as it demonstrates the difficulties of emerging from a “balance sheet recession”. [2] With the euro area still battling the impact of the financial crisis, an important question is: how does the current euro area economy compare with the dynamics in Japan during the 1990s? [3] Both episodes clearly share elements of a “balance sheet recession”, where strong credit expansion ends with a sharp correction in asset prices, thereby triggering the need for significant balance sheet adjustment.Yet, the scope of the required adjustment in the euro area when viewed at the aggregate level differs markedly from that in Japan, even if some euro area countries struggle with excessive leverageIn Japan, the sharp fall in equity prices from the peak of 1989 led to losses of almost 80% in the two decades that followed. Real estate prices also precipitated, with urban land prices declining by about 40%. By comparison, at the euro area aggregate level, equity prices fell by about 50% and have already rebounded from their post-Lehman trough, while residential property prices have fallen by a mere 3% since their peak in 2008. Moreover, the levels of indebtedness across sectors clearly differ. As for fiscal imbalances, the fiscal response in Japan meant an increase in public debt from 67% of GDP at the start of the 1990s to about 240% in 2012. For the euro area as a whole, the increase was much smaller, with aggregate debt increasing from below 70% in 2008 to 92% in 2012. Obviously, the euro area aggregate figures mask the large heterogeneity among Member States, where gross debt ranges from 10% of GDP in Estonia to 157% in Greece. This notwithstanding, it goes without saying that general debt levels in European countries need to decline, also in view of long-term demographic challenges. Turning to private sector debt, Japan faced severe adjustment needs in the corporate sector, with debt of non-financial corporations declining from 130% to 80% of GDP in the 15 years that followed the peak in economic activity. In the euro area, the debt level of the aggregate non-financial sector never reached the peaks seen in Japan and aggregate household indebtedness is also comparatively lower in the euro area. However, in those euro area countries which experienced housing bubbles, the household sectors have been facing much stronger adjustment problems. Here, again, euro area averages mask significant heterogeneity across Member States. In fact, some euro area countries have seen strong capital inflows and unsustainable debt-financed economic expansion. This has not only brought the risk of reversal, as seen after 2008 when private capital inflows dried up and domestic demand collapsed, it has also led to economic divergence within the euro area. Some countries have lost heavily in terms of competitiveness relative to their peer euro area countries. Regaining this competitiveness will indeed be a more gradual and tedious process. [4]The credit-financed housing boom in countries like Ireland and Spain led to residential property prices more than doubling in the seven years leading up to their peak. Since the peak, adjustments in house prices appear to have been completed in Ireland, while those in Spain are correcting more gradually. In both cases, the house price boom has left household debt-to-income ratios in these countries far above their pre-crisis levels with only a slow decline. To summarise, while euro area aggregate dynamics appear different from those observed in Japan at the beginning of the 1990s, some euro area countries do share some features that are very similar to the Japanese experience in that a prolonged balance sheet adjustment is underway. Notwithstanding this cross-country heterogeneity, a common response was required from monetary policy in the euro area to counter the initial fallout. The cuts in ECB policy rates together with our non-standard measures were crucial to contain the risks to price stability and to support the transmission of monetary policy across the currency area. While common monetary policy has been successful, the crisis has shown that we need more solid common institutions in other policy areas. In particular, a common monetary policy requires a common regulatory framework for the financial sector to be able to adequately repair the financial system, thereby securing a durable recovery in the euro area. The adverse impact of “zombie banks” and the evergreening of loans in Japan serve as a stark warning signal.Given the challenges ahead, we should not relax our efforts to put the euro area economies on track to strong and sustainable growth. That way, we can turn the current challenges into opportunities – as the title of today’s event suggests. Further managing the deleveraging process will be key, especially balancing the speed of adjustment and reforming euro area governance. Let me elaborate on these two aspects in turn.To overcome debt overhangs, we have basically two options. We can consolidate or restructure debt to address the nominal debt stock; or we can implement growth-enhancing structural reforms that make our economies fitter to grow out of the debt burden. Or we could opt for a combination of both. A third theoretically possible option allowing for higher inflation to reduce the real value of the debt would go against the core mandate of central banks. In recent years, we have seen some consolidation in Europe. As regards public finances, euro area fiscal deficits exceeded 6% at the peak of the crisis in 2009 and 2010, but are expected to fall below 3% this year, while primary budgets are even expected to post a surplus of 0.2%. [5] This adjustment strategy has brought with it painful cuts in our social models and has not been without controversy. In fact, some commentators and academics suggest that governments should continue increasing deficits to support aggregate demand while the private sector is deleveraging. They argue that parts of the private sector are debt-constraint and need to reduce their leverage, while parts that are unconstrained are not increasing their leverage sufficiently. [6] In such an environment the role for government spending is to expand demand for funds, and especially so when the nominal interest rate is constrained by the zero lower bound. [7] I would agree to this approach if the fiscal budget allowed for room for manoeuvre. But the recent sovereign debt crisis has shown that fiscal space is very limited for many European countries. In Japan, the strategy of fiscal expansion has led to a situation in which gross government debt levels now exceed 200% of GDP. The continued favourable financing conditions appear to also be owed to the fact that more than 90% of Japanese government bonds are held domestically. This situation can be seen as a special privilege for the government. But the high exposure of banks to their domestic sovereign – in fact, Japanese banks hold about 20% of their assets in domestic sovereign bonds – is not without risks, especially in the event of sudden reversals in market confidence. Maintaining financial and economic stability therefore requires a clear and long-term fiscal strategy to avoid disruptions. This is true for Japan and Europe alike. Debt consolidation is not limited to the public sector, however; it also applies to areas of the private sector with excess leverage. Let me focus on the euro area financial sector. While the ratio of financial sector liabilities to GDP has broadly stabilised, euro area large and complex banking groups have steadily increased the median core Tier 1 ratio from 8.3% in 2009 to above 11% in 2013. [8] To strengthen their capital position banks have issued equity, converted hybrids, received capital injections and raised the levels of retained earnings. The stronger capital positions also mean that the relative share of debt in financing is reduced and substituted by more equity, which should provide a better buffer against economic shocks. After all, debt is a relatively inflexible form of financing as it requires repayments on time and in full. But the stronger capital positions have also meant that banks have been shedding assets, a process which depresses credit growth and puts a drag on the economy. In addition, as households and non-financial corporations also reduce their indebtedness, they are demanding less financing from banks. Taken together, we can expect that bloated balance sheets will contract further. It is important that this deleveraging process occurs in an orderly manner by balancing the adjustment of assets and liabilities. Most of all, unnecessary fire sales generating detrimental falls in asset prices and credit rationing for productive investments need to be avoided. Throughout the crisis, the ECB has demonstrated its ability to actively mitigate these effects by ensuring abundant funding to the banking sector through its liquidity operations. But more is needed, especially regarding a more solid institutional framework to repair balance sheets in a way that limits systemic risk and avoids damage to the real economy.  The Japanese experience has shown the risks created when banks’ balance sheet problems are not recognised and addressed. Weakly capitalised banks initially extended loans to insolvent firms to limit the recognition of losses in the short run. Indications of evergreening became prominent as the share of loans to the construction sector continued rising for years after the bubble had burst, despite the fact that this sector was adjusting and needed to downsize. Write-offs on non-performing loans and necessary recapitalisations were delayed and the financial sector remained highly vulnerable to shocks. But delayed recognition was also facilitated by valuation standards that did not mark non-performing loans to market, unlike much of the losses from securitised products in the recent crises. In addition, the refusal of banks to foreclose on borrowers might have reflected a different resolution culture and code of civility in Japan; namely, one that eschews the large turnover of jobs and the frequent discharging of workers and avoids inducing a humiliating “loss of face” for delinquent borrowers. [9]For the real economy, the evergreening of loans implied a weakening of growth prospects. [10] Potentially more efficient enterprises were denied financing, thereby hampering the natural entry and exit of firms to the market place. Indeed, with the recession in Japan at the beginning of the 1990s, entry rates of firms declined from their pre-crisis peak of above 7% to a range of 4-5%, whereas firm exit rates remained subdued at their pre-crisis levels throughout the 1990s. [11]The lesson from this experience is to recognise non-performing loans in a timely manner and have strong institutions in place to deal with the restructuring. This reduces uncertainty and avoids adjustment delays. For the euro area, it is a call to move forward in completing the banking union.Up until now, supervisory and resolution authorities have operated at the national level. During the crisis this set-up has revealed pitfalls on three fronts. First, differences in supervision maintain humps and hollows in the euro area playing field, thereby distorting competition; second, differences in implicit state guarantees affect banks’ funding conditions; and third, differences in resolution frameworks – or a lack thereof – distort investor conditions across jurisdictions.The envisaged European banking union is meant to address these three pitfalls.  First, the single supervisory mechanism (SSM) will level the playing field in supervision. Only a month ago, on 12 September, the European Parliament paved the way for this truly European supervisory body. I hope that the Council will soon give its final consent. The ECB will then take over supervision of euro area banks in the second half of 2014.  We will ensure that euro area banks are supervised in a consistent and stringent manner. This implies impartial supervisory decisions across all Member States. We are already in the midst of preparations to make sure we reach this goal. The ECB is currently working on the methodological design for a comprehensive assessment. We will communicate details on the exercise in the second half of October, but I can already say today that the exercise will include a risk assessment and a balance sheet assessment. The results of this exercise will form the basis for a stress test to be carried out by the European Banking Authority in close collaboration with the ECB. In order to achieve its goal, this review needs to be rigorous and stringent. For it to be credible, we need commitment on sound backstops as a fall-back option for fulfilling capital needs. In Japan, such a close inspection of bank balance sheets was carried out in 2002. It proved to be an important step to recognising losses and cleaning balance sheets to eventually set off a gradual recovery with credit expansion in Japan. Second, one of the objectives of a European banking union is to delink banks from their sovereigns. That also implies that bank funding costs will depend on the quality of banks’ assets, and not on the location of their headquarters. Achieving this would mark a milestone in that it would establish a single capital market throughout Europe that companies can tap into. A single capital market, in turn, provides better financing for companies and eases productive investment, which will revitalise the European economies. Ultimately, it will be decisive in ensuring that Europe avoids a repeat of Japan’s “lost decade”, during which zombie banks poorly allocated financing across firms.  Third, orderly deleveraging in the euro area also requires that the restructuring and resolution of individual banks will not endanger financial stability or put public finances at risk. For this, the institutional framework needs to be solid. This is the rationale behind the creation of a single system with a single resolution authority and single resolution fund, in line with the proposal by the European Commission for a single resolution mechanism. The resolution fund is to be entirely financed ex ante by the financial industry itself so as to protect the European taxpayer. Still, until the fund is fully built up or for exceptional circumstances, it should be able to obtain external funds via a backstop. Here, the feasibility of a credit line from the European Stability Mechanism could be explored. Any such backstop should be temporary in nature and compensated by ex post levies on the banking sector ensuring that the fund is fiscally neutral over the medium term.A banking union with these elements in place has the potential to delink banks and sovereigns, not least by following an important principle: bail-in precedes bail-out. This will ensure that shareholders and unsecured creditors according to the hierarchy of their claims are the first to bear losses, not the taxpayers.Speaking in my capacity as a central banker, let me finally come to the role of monetary policy in the deleveraging process. To counter the risks from disorderly deleveraging, the swift cuts in ECB policy rates and our non-standard measures were key. Fixed-rate full allotment and longer-term refinancing operations stabilised financial markets early on and counteracted the risks from fire sales by providing liquidity where it was most needed.  Equally, the ECB did not shy away from bold measures to curtail tail risks and to restore the monetary policy transmission. Over the last year euro area financial fragmentation has fallen significantly, capital flows have reverted to stressed countries and financing costs for corporates have converged somewhat across countries.  These measures had the overarching purpose of ensuring price stability over the medium term. For the euro area, this is not merely lip service to the primary objective stated in the EU Treaty. It is, instead, the yardstick against which to measure the success of the ECB policies and to build credibility. In fact, inflation expectations remained firmly anchored throughout the crisis. By contrast, policy interest rates in Japan in the early 1990s remained at higher levels for longer, which, together with a lack of reforms in other areas, contributed to protracted economic weakness and falling prices. Eventually, inflation expectations became unanchored and made stabilisation more difficult for monetary policy once it was at the zero lower bound.Some commentators would go further and argue that central banks should loosen the belt in the deleveraging process to actively stoke high inflation. [12] I disagree with this line of reasoning. Although surprise inflation would reduce the real debt burden in the short run, it would sow doubts about the central banks’ ability and willingness to control inflation in the longer run. Ultimately, it would undermine efforts to implement structural changes and prudent policies. However, as the Japanese experience has shown, monetary policy alone cannot place the economy on a sustainable growth track. Bold monetary policy measures may be effective in the short run, but they also bear the risk of reducing incentives for banks to restructure balance sheets. We are aware of these risks.Furthermore, even if central banks operate within their own specific circumstances and mandates, the policy measures may lead to unintended spillovers to other countries. To ensure that monetary policy is transmitted adequately to the economy and domestic financing conditions are insulated from those prevailing in the global economy, sound macroeconomic policies and strong domestic institutions are vital. In addition, to place the economy back on track to sustainable growth, a medium-term fiscal consolidation strategy as well as structural reforms with productive investment are essential; these two elements combined with monetary policy form the three arrows identified by Prime Minister Abe. Monetary policy can buy time to implement structural changes and ease the deleveraging process, but it cannot cure the root causes of imbalances or be a substitute for structural reforms. Allow me to conclude.Both our economies face large challenges to counter the risks from deleveraging. Preventing disorderly deleveraging will remain key to limiting possible adverse effects on the economic performance in the most indebted euro area countries. At the same time, repairing banks’ balance sheets and ensuring their soundness is a pre-condition for re-establishing adequate financing of the economy. This is why the SSM, including the comprehensive assessment, and the single resolution mechanism are crucial steps towards improving euro area governance. The European institutional context may sometimes appear cumbersome, but the progress made shows that Europe recognises problems and responds to them.Nevertheless, even with these changes, solving a stock problem means addressing a prolonged adjustment in flows in the future. We are all well aware that debt consolidation alone weighs on economic activity just like a diet leaves one with the feeling of fatigue. The deleveraging process will require time; we should not lose patience in the process. Compared with past episodes, deleveraging has, in fact, become even more challenging. The global dimension of deleveraging makes burden-shifting across countries impossible and today’s demographic trends are putting strain on our growth prospects. It is therefore crucial to balance the consolidation across generations. [13] Nonetheless, I reemphasise the need to complement the consolidation process with structural changes in order to make our economies fitter. This involves reducing red tape to ease business creation, streamlining governance of state-owned enterprises and reallocating workers more flexibly from stagnating and declining industries to productive and expanding ones. Structural reforms are not only required in the countries in the euro area, but have also been recognised by Prime Minister Abe in his third arrow as essential to securing the Japanese recovery over the long term. Thank you for your attention.[1]I would like to thank Stephan Fahr, Georgi Krustev and Ana Lima for their contributions to this speech; all views expressed remain mine [2]Termed by Richard Koo in Koo, R., The Holy Grail of Macroeconomics: Lessons from Japan's Great Recession, Wiley, 2009.[3]See also “Comparing the recent financial crisis in the United States and the euro area with the experience of Japan in the 1990s”, Monthly Bulletin, ECB, May 2012. [4]Of course, in a ﬁnancially integrated area comprising several countries, ﬁnancial deﬁcits (or surpluses) of a given sector in any country can, in principle, be ﬁnanced (or invested) equally well in any other country within the area. Following this line of reasoning, cross-country patterns in sectoral ﬁnancial balances could reflect increased financial integration within the euro area. At the same time, the build-up of external deﬁcits and surpluses across euro area countries reﬂects not only growth differentials, but also rising imbalances in competitiveness, particularly when measured by unit labour costs.[5]Fiscal deficits in the euro area reached 6.4% of GDP in 2009 and 6.2% in 2010 (according to Eurostat). The European Commission forecasts -2.9% in its Spring 2013 European Economic Forecast.[6]See Eggertsson, G. and Krugman, P., “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127 (3), 2012, pp. 1469-1513, and Guerrieri, V. and Lorenzoni, G., “Credit Crises, Precautionary Savings, and the Liquidity Trap”, NBER Working Papers, No 17583, 2011. [7]See also the series on deleveraging by Martin Wolf in the Financial Times, initiated with the comment “We still have that sinking feeling”, Financial Times, 10 July 2012, and the comment “Ways to accelerate private-sector deleveraging”, 30 July 2012.[8]See ECB, Financial Stability Review, May 2013.[9]On this point, see Greenspan, A., The Age of Turbulence: Adventures in a New World, Penguin, 2007, pp. 289-290.[10]See, for instance, Caballero, R., Hoshi, T. and Kashyap, A., “Zombie lending and depressed restructuring in Japan”,  American Economic Review, Vol. 95, 2008, pp. 1943-1977, Peek, J. and Rosengren, E., “Unnatural Selection: Perverse Incentives and the Misallocation of Credit in Japan”, American Economic Review, 95, 2005, pp. 1144-1166, and Nishimura, K.G. and Kawamoto, Y., “Why does the problem persist? ‘Rational Rigidity’ and the plight of Japanese banks”, The World Economy, Vol. 26, 2003, pp. 301-324.[11]Entries of business establishments declined from their peak of 7.4% in 1988 and have not exceeded 5.0% since then, whereas exit rates remained at subdued levels of 2.5-4.0% between 1988 and 2000 and have increased to above 4.0% since then. [12]See, for example, Blanchard, O., Dell'Ariccia, G. and Mauro, P., “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 42(s1), 2010, pp. 199-215.[13]See, for example, Tokuoka, K., “Intergenerational Implications of Fiscal Consolidation in Japan”, IMF Working Papers, 12/197, 2012.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen pleasur abl share thought challeng opportun japan europ face global economi sinc begin financi crisi shortag challeng along road back would call normal function economi one biggest challeng see still address grow era deleverag deleverag occur order fashion chaotic may drag economi place stronger foot case depend larg extent manag process today focus comment polici challeng face two economi especi regard manag deleverag process euro area keep mind japanes experi wit japan protract largescal balanc sheet adjust weaken econom activ protract period time repair financi sector import element improv japanes economi lesson euro area appear clear overhaul financi architectur includ establish procedur resolv fail bank need accomplish entireti select mend enough view make use momentum offer crisi turn challeng opportun opportun put economi sounder foot underscor think need address today challeng comprehens manner institut crucial achiev first briefli review buildup adjust financi imbal japan europ elabor manag deleverag process institut chang implement touch upon role monetari polici play japanes experi provid import lesson demonstr difficulti emerg balanc sheet recess euro area still battl impact financi crisi import question current euro area economi compar dynam japan episod clear share element balanc sheet recess strong credit expans end sharp correct asset price therebi trigger need signific balanc sheet adjust yet scope requir adjust euro area view aggreg level differ mark japan even euro area countri struggl excess leveragein japan sharp fall equiti price peak led loss almost two decad follow real estat price also precipit urban land price declin comparison euro area aggreg level equiti price fell alreadi rebound postlehman trough residenti properti price fallen mere sinc peak moreov level indebted across sector clear differ fiscal imbal fiscal respons japan meant increas public debt gdp start euro area whole increas much smaller aggreg debt increas obvious euro area aggreg figur mask larg heterogen among member state gross debt rang gdp estonia greec notwithstand goe without say general debt level european countri need declin also view longterm demograph challeng turn privat sector debt japan face sever adjust need corpor sector debt nonfinanci corpor declin gdp year follow peak econom activ euro area debt level aggreg nonfinanci sector never reach peak seen japan aggreg household indebted also compar lower euro area howev euro area countri experienc hous bubbl household sector face much stronger adjust problem euro area averag mask signific heterogen across member state fact euro area countri seen strong capit inflow unsustain debtfinanc econom expans brought risk revers seen privat capit inflow dri domest demand collaps also led econom diverg within euro area countri lost heavili term competit relat peer euro area countri regain competit inde gradual tedious process creditfinanc hous boom countri like ireland spain led residenti properti price doubl seven year lead peak sinc peak adjust hous price appear complet ireland spain correct gradual case hous price boom left household debttoincom ratio countri far precrisi level slow declin summaris euro area aggreg dynam appear differ observ japan begin euro area countri share featur similar japanes experi prolong balanc sheet adjust underway notwithstand crosscountri heterogen common respons requir monetari polici euro area counter initi fallout cut ecb polici rate togeth nonstandard measur crucial contain risk price stabil support transmiss monetari polici across currenc area common monetari polici success crisi shown need solid common institut polici area particular common monetari polici requir common regulatori framework financi sector abl adequ repair financi system therebi secur durabl recoveri euro area advers impact zombi bank evergreen loan japan serv stark warn signal given challeng ahead relax effort put euro area economi track strong sustain growth way turn current challeng opportun titl today event suggest manag deleverag process key especi balanc speed adjust reform euro area govern let elabor two aspect turn overcom debt overhang basic two option consolid restructur debt address nomin debt stock implement growthenhanc structur reform make economi fitter grow debt burden could opt combin third theoret possibl option allow higher inflat reduc real valu debt would go core mandat central bank recent year seen consolid europ regard public financ euro area fiscal deficit exceed peak crisi expect fall year primari budget even expect post surplus adjust strategi brought pain cut social model without controversi fact comment academ suggest govern continu increas deficit support aggreg demand privat sector deleverag argu part privat sector debtconstraint need reduc leverag part unconstrain increas leverag suffici environ role govern spend expand demand fund especi nomin interest rate constrain zero lower bound would agre approach fiscal budget allow room manoeuvr recent sovereign debt crisi shown fiscal space limit mani european countri japan strategi fiscal expans led situat gross govern debt level exceed gdp continu favour financ condit appear also owe fact japanes govern bond held domest situat seen special privileg govern high exposur bank domest sovereign fact japanes bank hold asset domest sovereign bond without risk especi event sudden revers market confid maintain financi econom stabil therefor requir clear longterm fiscal strategi avoid disrupt true japan europ alik debt consolid limit public sector howev also appli area privat sector excess leverag let focus euro area financi sector ratio financi sector liabil gdp broad stabilis euro area larg complex bank group steadili increas median core tier ratio strengthen capit posit bank issu equiti convert hybrid receiv capit inject rais level retain earn stronger capit posit also mean relat share debt financ reduc substitut equiti provid better buffer econom shock debt relat inflex form financ requir repay time full stronger capit posit also meant bank shed asset process depress credit growth put drag economi addit household nonfinanci corpor also reduc indebted demand less financ bank taken togeth expect bloat balanc sheet contract import deleverag process occur order manner balanc adjust asset liabil unnecessari fire sale generat detriment fall asset price credit ration product invest need avoid throughout crisi ecb demonstr abil activ mitig effect ensur abund fund bank sector liquid oper need especi regard solid institut framework repair balanc sheet way limit system risk avoid damag real economi japanes experi shown risk creat bank balanc sheet problem recognis address weak capitalis bank initi extend loan insolv firm limit recognit loss short run indic evergreen becam promin share loan construct sector continu rise year bubbl burst despit fact sector adjust need downsiz writeoff nonperform loan necessari recapitalis delay financi sector remain high vulner shock delay recognit also facilit valuat standard mark nonperform loan market unlik much loss securitis product recent crise addit refus bank foreclos borrow might reflect differ resolut cultur code civil japan name one eschew larg turnov job frequent discharg worker avoid induc humili loss face delinqu borrow real economi evergreen loan impli weaken growth prospect potenti effici enterpris deni financ therebi hamper natur entri exit firm market place inde recess japan begin entri rate firm declin precrisi peak rang wherea firm exit rate remain subdu precrisi level throughout lesson experi recognis nonperform loan time manner strong institut place deal restructur reduc uncertainti avoid adjust delay euro area call move forward complet bank union supervisori resolut author oper nation level crisi setup reveal pitfal three front first differ supervis maintain hump hollow euro area play field therebi distort competit second differ implicit state guarante affect bank fund condit third differ resolut framework lack thereof distort investor condit across jurisdict envisag european bank union meant address three pitfal first singl supervisori mechan ssm level play field supervis month ago septemb european parliament pave way truli european supervisori bodi hope council soon give final consent ecb take supervis euro area bank second half ensur euro area bank supervis consist stringent manner impli imparti supervisori decis across member state alreadi midst prepar make sure reach goal ecb current work methodolog design comprehens assess communic detail exercis second half octob alreadi say today exercis includ risk assess balanc sheet assess result exercis form basi stress test carri european bank author close collabor ecb order achiev goal review need rigor stringent credibl need commit sound backstop fallback option fulfil capit need japan close inspect bank balanc sheet carri prove import step recognis loss clean balanc sheet eventu set gradual recoveri credit expans japan second one object european bank union delink bank sovereign also impli bank fund cost depend qualiti bank asset locat headquart achiev would mark mileston would establish singl capit market throughout europ compani tap singl capit market turn provid better financ compani eas product invest revitalis european economi ultim decis ensur europ avoid repeat japan lost decad zombi bank poor alloc financ across firm third order deleverag euro area also requir restructur resolut individu bank endang financi stabil put public financ risk institut framework need solid rational behind creation singl system singl resolut author singl resolut fund line propos european commiss singl resolut mechan resolut fund entir financ ex ant financi industri protect european taxpay still fund fulli built except circumst abl obtain extern fund via backstop feasibl credit line european stabil mechan could explor backstop temporari natur compens ex post levi bank sector ensur fund fiscal neutral medium term bank union element place potenti delink bank sovereign least follow import principl bailin preced bailout ensur sharehold unsecur creditor accord hierarchi claim first bear loss taxpay speak capac central banker let final come role monetari polici deleverag process counter risk disord deleverag swift cut ecb polici rate nonstandard measur key fixedr full allot longerterm refinanc oper stabilis financi market earli counteract risk fire sale provid liquid need equal ecb shi away bold measur curtail tail risk restor monetari polici transmiss last year euro area financi fragment fallen signific capit flow revert stress countri financ cost corpor converg somewhat across countri measur overarch purpos ensur price stabil medium term euro area mere lip servic primari object state eu treati instead yardstick measur success ecb polici build credibl fact inflat expect remain firm anchor throughout crisi contrast polici interest rate japan earli remain higher level longer togeth lack reform area contribut protract econom weak fall price eventu inflat expect becam unanchor made stabilis difficult monetari polici zero lower bound comment would go argu central bank loosen belt deleverag process activ stoke high inflat disagre line reason although surpris inflat would reduc real debt burden short run would sow doubt central bank abil willing control inflat longer run ultim would undermin effort implement structur chang prudent polici howev japanes experi shown monetari polici alon cannot place economi sustain growth track bold monetari polici measur may effect short run also bear risk reduc incent bank restructur balanc sheet awar risk furthermor even central bank oper within specif circumst mandat polici measur may lead unintend spillov countri ensur monetari polici transmit adequ economi domest financ condit insul prevail global economi sound macroeconom polici strong domest institut vital addit place economi back track sustain growth mediumterm fiscal consolid strategi well structur reform product invest essenti two element combin monetari polici form three arrow identifi prime minist abe monetari polici buy time implement structur chang eas deleverag process cannot cure root caus imbal substitut structur reform allow conclud economi face larg challeng counter risk deleverag prevent disord deleverag remain key limit possibl advers effect econom perform indebt euro area countri time repair bank balanc sheet ensur sound precondit reestablish adequ financ economi ssm includ comprehens assess singl resolut mechan crucial step toward improv euro area govern european institut context may sometim appear cumbersom progress made show europ recognis problem respond nevertheless even chang solv stock problem mean address prolong adjust flow futur well awar debt consolid alon weigh econom activ like diet leav one feel fatigu deleverag process requir time lose patienc process compar past episod deleverag fact becom even challeng global dimens deleverag make burdenshift across countri imposs today demograph trend put strain growth prospect therefor crucial balanc consolid across generat nonetheless reemphasis need complement consolid process structur chang order make economi fitter involv reduc red tape eas busi creation streamlin govern stateown enterpris realloc worker flexibl stagnat declin industri product expand one structur reform requir countri euro area also recognis prime minist abe third arrow essenti secur japanes recoveri long term thank attent would like thank stephan fahr georgi krustev ana lima contribut speech view express remain mine term richard koo koo r holi grail macroeconom lesson japan great recess wiley see also compar recent financi crisi unit state euro area experi japan month bulletin ecb may cours ﬁnancial integr area compris sever countri ﬁnancial deﬁcit surplus given sector countri principl ﬁnanc invest equal well countri within area follow line reason crosscountri pattern sector ﬁnancial balanc could reflect increas financi integr within euro area time buildup extern deﬁcit surplus across euro area countri reﬂect growth differenti also rise imbal competit particular measur unit labour cost fiscal deficit euro area reach gdp accord eurostat european commiss forecast spring european econom forecast see eggertsson g krugman p debt deleverag liquid trap fisherminskykoo approach quarter journal econom pp guerrieri v lorenzoni g credit crise precautionari save liquid trap nber work paper see also seri deleverag wolf financi time initi comment still sink feel financi time juli comment way acceler privatesector deleverag juli see ecb financi stabil review may point see greenspan age turbul adventur new world penguin pp see instanc caballero r hoshi kashyap zombi lend depress restructur japan american econom review vol pp peek j rosengren e unnatur select pervers incent misalloc credit japan american econom review pp nishimura k g kawamoto y problem persist ration rigid plight japanes bank world economi vol pp entri busi establish declin peak exceed sinc wherea exit rate remain subdu level increas sinc see exampl blanchard o dell ariccia g mauro p rethink macroeconom polici journal money credit bank pp see exampl tokuoka k intergener implic fiscal consolid japan imf work paper reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en