Benoît Cœuré: Life below zero: Learning about negative interest rates,09-09-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,3482,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen [1] (Slide 1),It is a pleasure to be here with you tonight. The Money Market Contact Group plays a key role in informing the ECB's decision making process. As a tribute to your collective foresight, I would like to recall that in your meeting on 25 June 2012, you were among the first to discuss the operational consequences of lowering the ECB's Deposit Facility Rate (DFR) to zero or below zero. This will be the topic of my remarks tonight [2].A few months ago, on 5 June, the ECB lowered the main refinancing rate to 0.15%, the marginal lending rate to 0.40%, and – maybe most noteworthy – the Deposit Facility Rate to minus 0.10%. Last week, on 4 September, these rates were cut to 0.05%, 0.30% and -0.20% respectively, and it was stated that the lower bound had now been reached. The ECB also decided in June to remunerate current account balances in excess of the minimum reserve requirements at the deposit facility rate as opposed to zero as was the case previously. With these measures, we entered practically uncharted territory.When Gregory Mankiw in 2009 stated in the New York Times that “it may be time […] to go negative”, he revived an idea that may seem odd at first. If lowering interest rates stimulates the economy and policy rates are already very low or even zero, then why not keep cutting rates and have negative interest rates? The idea of negative rates, that is, lending 100 and getting back say 95, may seem absurd “but remember this: Early mathematicians thought the idea of a negative number was absurd [too]“. [3]In fact, the idea of negative interest rates, or “taxing money”, goes back to the late nineteenth century, to Silvio Gesell, the German founder of “Freiwirtschaft”. The historic academic opinion on Gesell is divided. Irving Fisher supported him and John Maynard Keynes called him “a strange, unduly neglected prophet”, others a “typical monetary crank”. [4]So where do we stand in the euro area? I would like to answer this question today by addressing the following points:What does it mean to have one of our policy rates, the deposit facility rate, below zero? Why did we go negative?What are in principle the benefits and costs of such a move? And, with the benefit of some hindsight since June, what is the initial assessment?To begin with, it is important to point out that the deposit facility rate has a specific, narrow meaning: under a negative DFR, banks that have more funds in their account with the ECB than what they need to fulfil their reserve requirement lose some money. Suppose, for instance, that a bank has €100 million of excess reserves continuously for one year, then at an interest rate of -0.20% it receives back € 99.8 million, so the cost of depositing funds with the ECB for a full year is € 200,000.Why do banks accept such a cost of depositing excess reserves with the central bank? The answer is that the alternatives to depositing excess reserves are also costly. In fact, the cost of using alternatives to central bank deposits determines to what extent the rate on excess reserves can go negative in practice.Banks can always choose to hold physical currency instead of electronic money in their accounts with the ECB. Since physical currency has a zero nominal rate of return, there is what I would call an “economic lower bound” for the rate on excess reserves. It is difficult to identify but it is not zero because the effective rate of return on currency is negative. One does not even need to impose a demurrage rate or regular stamping on banknotes, as Irving Fischer has proposed based on Gesell’s ideas [5]. There is a cost of storing, holding, and more importantly, using physical currency [6]. This involves the cost of renting, maintaining and securing storage facilities such as vaults as well as the cost of shipping currency around in a safe and timely manner. A recent ECB study estimated the private cost of cash payments to be 1.1% of GDP on average in the participating countries. [7] The unit social cost was estimated at 2.3 cents per euro of transaction. This is substantially higher than the unit social cost of a credit transfer or other non-cash means of payments per euro of transaction. Because the overnight unsecured money market alone currently involves hundreds of banks with an aggregate transaction volume of around € 40-50 billion every day, replicating this scale of transacting with physical money would be a formidable and costly task, both privately and socially.I would not go as far as Kenneth Rogoff and conclude that having only electronic money, by pushing down the economic lower bound, would recreate room for manoeuvre for central banks in a protractedly low inflation environment. [8] The ECB is committed to bringing euro area inflation back at a level below but close to 2%, in line with its mandate.But what is then the rationale for a negative rate on the deposit facility? Why impose a cost on banks’ excess reserves?One should view the negative rate in the context of the ECB’s aim to provide further monetary policy accommodation inter alia by lowering policy rates without impairing market intermediation. [9] There are a number of reasons why it is desirable to keep a certain distance between the main refinancing and the deposit rates. The relative difference between the cost of borrowing from the ECB and the benefit of depositing with the ECB determines the incentive to lend in the interbank market. Having an active interbank market is important to obtain price signals about the transmission of policy rates into the economy. It is also important to reduce bank excessive reliance on central bank money, which has been a key factor of resilience in the post-crisis environment.In the words of Michael Woodford, “the demand for [overnight funds] is a function of the location of the overnight rate relative to the lending rate and the deposit rate, but independent of the absolute level of any of these interest rates.” [10]To see the role of the relative difference, consider the following thought experiment. For the sake of the argument, let me abstract from credit risk in the overnight market and assume that there is enough eligible collateral to borrow from the ECB. Hence, there would be no material difference between very short-term secured and unsecured borrowing and lending. Banks with excess reserves would only lend in the interbank market at a rate that is above the deposit rate. Banks with a shortage of reserves would only borrow in the interbank market at a rate that is below the main refinancing rate. Suppose now the main refinancing rate is equal to the deposit rate. Then there is no rate at which trade is possible. Hence, it is important to keep a spread between the main refinancing and the deposit rate in order to support market activity.Another benefit of lowering the deposit rate together with the main refinancing rate is that in the current situation with excess liquidity, short-term interest rates such as EONIA track the deposit rate more closely than the main refinancing rate. [11] The banking system as a whole has excess liquidity, which currently stands at around € 130 billion. When the excess liquidity increases, rates fall since less must be borrowed in the interbank market (the demand curve shifts down). In order to make sure that the monetary policy accommodation is passed on to the interbank market under fixed-rate full allotment and excess liquidity, it is therefore not enough to lower just the main refinancing rate. In fact, the deposit rate may be the most important policy rate of a central bank in an environment of excess liquidity.The decision to lower rates, which was accompanied by a number of other measures to stimulate credit to the economy such as “targeted” long-term operations (to induce banks to lend more to the real sector) and an announcement of purchases of asset-backed securities and covered bonds based on claims on the euro area real economy, is also fully in line with the ECB’s forward guidance. Forward guidance implies that interest rates remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of time conditional on an assessment of the economic outlook. Following the June decision, the lower policy rates were transmitted well to the money market and, in line with forward guidance, market uncertainty about the expected path of policy rates fell. EONIA forwards curves flattened and shifted down (Slide 2). In addition, the volatility of EONIA rates as well as the option-implied volatility of short-term interest rates dropped. The lower policy rates were also transmitted to longer maturities and to market segments other than the unsecured money market. EURIBOR rates and rates implied by EURIBOR futures fell after the June decision and again after the September decision (Slide 3 and 4). Unsecured money market interest rates are now negative for a maturity of up two weeks. Besides, the General Collateral (GC) pooling repo curve as well as yields on euro area Treasury bills and notes have further adjusted.The EONIA has regularly been set in negative territory since 28 August together with stable trading volumes (the average daily EONIA volume from January to June 2014 was € 26.1 billion and was € 28.9 billion since June) (Slide 5) and homogenous transmission to closely substitutable market segments, such as GC pooling repo, are evidence that a large fraction of unsecured money market transactions can take place at negative rates without hampering market functioning. This reflects an effective and well-coordinated preparation of market participants since the ECB first mentioned the possibility of bringing the DFR below zero. The fact that money market trading volumes did not fall (they actually rose) is remarkable given the fears some observers had expressed, informed by the Japanese experience of the 1990s, on the potential impact on market functioning of a negative DFR and of very low policy rates more generally.Will the transmission of lower short-term rates to a lower cost of credit for the real economy be as smooth? While bank lending rates have come down in the past in line with lower policy rates, there is a limit to how cheap bank lending can be. The mark-up that banks add to the cost of obtaining funding from the central bank compensates for credit risk, term premia and the cost of originating, screening and monitoring loans. The need for such compensation does not necessarily fall when policy rates are lowered. If anything, a central bank lowers rates when the economy needs stimulus, which is precisely when it is difficult for banks to find good loan making opportunities. It remains to be seen whether and to what extent the recent monetary policy accommodation translates into cheaper bank lending. [12] Another concern with lowering rates is that it may contribute to the instability of the financial sector. While this can be a valid concern, in practice, a causal chain is difficult to establish. Do low rates really lead to instability (e.g., though an excess search for yield) or are rates low because there has been instability in the financial system and the economy is in need of stimulus? [13] That said, reducing excessive risk aversion in financial markets has been a welcome (side) effect of central bank policies during the crisis. The question is whether risk-taking in the financial sector has now already gone too far, contributing to growing financial imbalances, frothy asset price valuations and too loose credit standards. Irrespective of the answer to this question, given the low inflation environment, it is clear that monetary policy cannot currently assume the role of addressing such concerns for the euro area. It is therefore the task of macro-prudential policies to deal with potential financial imbalances. The supervisory set-up in Europe has undergone significant improvements that will help to ensure the soundness of the financial system. As we enter an extended period of low interest rates, we must stand ready to use to their full extent the new macro-prudential instruments that the national competent authorities and the ECB are now entrusted with.An important aspect of lowering policy rates was that it also reaffirmed our forward guidance and helped to clarify the ECB’s commitment to ensure that the monetary policy stance remains appropriate to the needs of the euro area economy. This is reflected in the EONIA-OIS curve being now flat and in negative territory for a maturity of up to three years, reflecting market expectations of negative EONIA fixings well into 2017 (Slide 6 ), and in a widening gap between the expected path of US and euro area interest rates. (Slide 7).A negative deposit rate can, however, also have adverse consequences. For a start, it imposes a cost on banks with excess reserves and could therefore reduce their profitability. Note, however, that this applies to any reduction of the deposit rate and not just to those that make the rate negative. For sure, lower bank profitability could hamper economic recovery, especially in times when banks have to deleverage owning to stricter regulation and enhanced market scrutiny. But whether bank profitability really falls when policy rates are lowered depends more generally on the slope of the yield curve (as banks’ funding costs may also fall), on banks' investment policies (as there is scope for them to diversify their cash investment both along the curve and across the credit universe) and on factors driving non-interest income. [14] More fundamentally, banks are profitable in a healthy economy where households and companies strive to finance their projects, which is what our accommodative monetary policy aims to achieve in the first place. In fact, both ensuring a smooth transmission of our low policy rates to the cost of credit to the economy and supporting the profitability of banks will ultimately depend on whether economic policies at the euro area and at the country level are successful in putting euro area economies back on a path of strong and stable growth, by mobilising both supply-side and, where available, demand-side instruments. A prudent, well-capitalised banking system is needed in any case, and the ECB’s Comprehensive Assessment together with the start of the Single Supervisory Mechanism are key in this respect.In order to avoid the cost of excess reserves, banks may also, decide to borrow less from the ECB. This would reduce excess liquidity in the banking system and put upward pressure on interest rates in the interbank and bond market, which could counteract the reduction of policy rates. But this is not what we have seen so far. Despite the discussion on the adverse consequences of a negative deposit rate, there was no significant impact on the functioning of money markets. I already mentioned the smooth transmission of rates and the stable trading volume in EONIA. Similarly, the level of excess liquidity or the amount of deposits with the ECB (Slide 8) has been largely unaffected. However, one possible reason for the stable level of the money market function could be the declining, but still existing fragmentation of the money markets. While a lot has been achieved, for example TARGET2 imbalances have fallen by nearly half since their peak in mid-2012 (at € 572bn on 3 September, € 541bn below their peak level reached in July 2012), market fragmentation in the euro area is still present. [15]If banks with excess reserves are predominately highly profitable banks located in non-stressed countries, then a potential adverse effect on bank profitability may be less of a concern from the financial stability perspective. Similarly, if banks have good reason to borrow from the ECB, for instance when other sources of funding are not available, and if those banks that borrow are not necessarily the same as those that deposit with the ECB, then excess liquidity in the banking system may not fall.What about the impact of negative rates on market fragmentation in the euro area? Evidence from actual money market transactions shows that fragmentation still significantly hampers the smooth transmission of lower rates across the euro area. Banks located in non-stressed countries can now borrow in the overnight unsecured market at negative rates. Rates for borrowers located in stressed countries are mostly positive and the distribution of rates is wide, ranging from slightly negative to slightly above the main refinancing rate.That said, there is some evidence that lower rates have reduced fragmentation in secured markets. The search for yield in the low rate environment has increased the demand for higher yielding, but still safe products such as repo or sovereign bonds, including those of non-core countries. [16] The higher demand has pushed down and thus compressed interest rates in secured markets.Let me conclude. Given the theoretical arguments for and against lowering some policy rates into negative territory, and given the practical experience so far, what is the verdict? Or, coming back to the opinions on Gesell: should he be considered a prophet or monetary crank?While the final verdict is certainly still out, based on the presented evidence so far, it seems fair to say that the lowering of policy rates, with the deposit rate moving into negative territory, has provided an appropriate monetary policy stimulus to the euro area economy, comforted the forward guidance of the ECB, and contributed to some reduction in market fragmentation, without having an adverse impact on the functioning of money markets.As the money market settles in negative territory, and other market segments start experiencing negative yields, we now have to make sure that the broader market community is prepared to cope with this new environment.Thank you for your attention.[1]I would like to thank Florian Heider for his contribution to this presentation. All opinions expressed remain mine.[2]ECB DG Market Operations, 2012, Summary of the discussion of the Money Market Contact Group, 25 June 2012, available on the ECB website. For an early discussion, see also Cœuré, B., 2012. “Central banks and the challenges of the lower bound”. Intervention at the Meeting on the Financial Crisis hosted by the Initiative on Global Markets, at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Miami, 19 February.[3]Mankiw, G., 2009, “It may be time for the Fed to go negative”, New York Time (April 19). See also W. Buiter, 2009. “Negative interest rates: when are they coming to a central bank near you?”, May 2009. [4]See Ilgmann, C. and M. Menner, 2011, “Negative nominal rates: history and current proposals,” International Economics and Economic Policy, 8, 383-405. See also Gesell, S., 1958. The Natural Economic Order. London: Peter Owen Ltd., and Fisher, I., 1933. Stamp Script. New York: Adelphi.[5]Stamping of banknotes was famously tried in the city of Wörgl, Austria, in 1932. Bills were introduced with a devaluation rate of 1% per month unless holders would buy stamps to extend their nominal value. See Champ, B., 2008. Stamp script: Money people paid to use. Economic Commentary, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, April.[6]Beyond the direct opportunity cost, moving the deposit rate into deeply negative territory may involve indirect costs, depending on the ability of banks to pass it to their customers, in particular retail ones. [7]Schmiedel, H., Kostova, G., and W. Ruttenberg, 2012. “The social and private costs of retail payment instruments. A European perspective,” ECB Occasional Papers Series , No. 137.[8]Rogoff, K., 2014, “Costs and benefits to phasing out paper currency,” NBER Working Paper 20126 [9]For an early explicit analysis of this rationale in a New-Keynesian model, see Buiter, W. and N. Panigirtzoglou, 2003, “Overcoming the zero bound on nominal interest rates with negative interest on currency: Gesell’s solution,” The Economic Journal, 113, 723-746.[10]Woodford, M., 2001, “Monetary policy in the information economy,” Paper presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium at Jackson Hole (30 August – 1 September).[11]For a review of the impact of non-standard monetary policy on money market functioning, see Monnet, C. and M. Bech, 2013, “The impact of unconventional monetary policy on the overnight interbank market,” Reserve Bank of Australia 2013 Annual Conference Volume on “Liquidity and Funding Markets”.[12]For a recent review of the bank lending channel of monetary policy transmission with a special focus on the crisis experience, see Gambacorta, L. and D. Marques-Ibanez, 2011, “The bank lending channel: Lessons from the crisis,” BIS Working Paper No. 345.[13]For causal evidence that lower interest rates lead to more risk-taking by banks, see Jimenez, G., Peydro, J., Ongena, S. and J. Saurina, 2012, “Hazardous time for monetary policy: What do 23 million loans say about the impact of monetary policy on credit risk-taking?”, Econometrica, forthcoming. [14]There is evidence that the lower interest rate environment in the United States adversely affects money market funds, see Kacperczyk, M. and M Di Maggio, 2014, “The unintended consequences of the zero lower bound policy”, Working Paper, Columbia Business School. This is, however, less of a concern in Europe where money market funds are not central to the financial system.[15]For more information, see the ECB Report “Financial Integration in Europe” (April 2014).[16]According to the latest ICMA survey of 4 September, the repo market size increased by 3.3% during the last 6 months from EUR 5,499 billion to EUR 5,782 billion.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen slide pleasur tonight money market contact group play key role inform ecb decis make process tribut collect foresight would like recal meet june among first discuss oper consequ lower ecb deposit facil rate dfr zero zero topic remark tonight month ago june ecb lower main refinanc rate margin lend rate mayb noteworthi deposit facil rate minus last week septemb rate cut respect state lower bound reach ecb also decid june remuner current account balanc excess minimum reserv requir deposit facil rate oppos zero case previous measur enter practic unchart territori gregori mankiw state new york time may time go negat reviv idea may seem odd first lower interest rate stimul economi polici rate alreadi low even zero keep cut rate negat interest rate idea negat rate lend get back say may seem absurd rememb earli mathematician thought idea negat number absurd fact idea negat interest rate tax money goe back late nineteenth centuri silvio gesel german founder freiwirtschaft histor academ opinion gesel divid irv fisher support maynard keyn call strang unduli neglect prophet other typic monetari crank stand euro area would like answer question today address follow point mean one polici rate deposit facil rate zero go negat principl benefit cost move benefit hindsight sinc june initi assess begin import point deposit facil rate specif narrow mean negat dfr bank fund account ecb need fulfil reserv requir lose money suppos instanc bank million excess reserv continu one year interest rate receiv back million cost deposit fund ecb full year bank accept cost deposit excess reserv central bank answer altern deposit excess reserv also cost fact cost use altern central bank deposit determin extent rate excess reserv go negat practic bank alway choos hold physic currenc instead electron money account ecb sinc physic currenc zero nomin rate return would call econom lower bound rate excess reserv difficult identifi zero effect rate return currenc negat one even need impos demurrag rate regular stamp banknot irv fischer propos base gesel idea cost store hold import use physic currenc involv cost rent maintain secur storag facil vault well cost ship currenc around safe time manner recent ecb studi estim privat cost cash payment gdp averag particip countri unit social cost estim cent per euro transact substanti higher unit social cost credit transfer noncash mean payment per euro transact overnight unsecur money market alon current involv hundr bank aggreg transact volum around billion everi day replic scale transact physic money would formid cost task privat social would go far kenneth rogoff conclud electron money push econom lower bound would recreat room manoeuvr central bank protract low inflat environ ecb commit bring euro area inflat back level close line mandat rational negat rate deposit facil impos cost bank excess reserv one view negat rate context ecb aim provid monetari polici accommod inter alia lower polici rate without impair market intermedi number reason desir keep certain distanc main refinanc deposit rate relat differ cost borrow ecb benefit deposit ecb determin incent lend interbank market activ interbank market import obtain price signal transmiss polici rate economi also import reduc bank excess relianc central bank money key factor resili postcrisi environ word woodford demand overnight fund function locat overnight rate relat lend rate deposit rate independ absolut level interest rate see role relat differ consid follow thought experi sake argument let abstract credit risk overnight market assum enough elig collater borrow ecb henc would materi differ shortterm secur unsecur borrow lend bank excess reserv would lend interbank market rate deposit rate bank shortag reserv would borrow interbank market rate main refinanc rate suppos main refinanc rate equal deposit rate rate trade possibl henc import keep spread main refinanc deposit rate order support market activ anoth benefit lower deposit rate togeth main refinanc rate current situat excess liquid shortterm interest rate eonia track deposit rate close main refinanc rate bank system whole excess liquid current stand around billion excess liquid increas rate fall sinc less must borrow interbank market demand curv shift order make sure monetari polici accommod pass interbank market fixedr full allot excess liquid therefor enough lower main refinanc rate fact deposit rate may import polici rate central bank environ excess liquid decis lower rate accompani number measur stimul credit economi target longterm oper induc bank lend real sector announc purchas assetback secur cover bond base claim euro area real economi also fulli line ecb forward guidanc forward guidanc impli interest rate remain present lower level extend period time condit assess econom outlook follow june decis lower polici rate transmit well money market line forward guidanc market uncertainti expect path polici rate fell eonia forward curv flatten shift slide addit volatil eonia rate well optionimpli volatil shortterm interest rate drop lower polici rate also transmit longer matur market segment unsecur money market euribor rate rate impli euribor futur fell june decis septemb decis slide unsecur money market interest rate negat matur two week besid general collater gc pool repo curv well yield euro area treasuri bill note adjust eonia regular set negat territori sinc august togeth stabl trade volum averag daili eonia volum januari june billion billion sinc june slide homogen transmiss close substitut market segment gc pool repo evid larg fraction unsecur money market transact take place negat rate without hamper market function reflect effect wellcoordin prepar market particip sinc ecb first mention possibl bring dfr zero fact money market trade volum fall actual rose remark given fear observ express inform japanes experi potenti impact market function negat dfr low polici rate general transmiss lower shortterm rate lower cost credit real economi smooth bank lend rate come past line lower polici rate limit cheap bank lend markup bank add cost obtain fund central bank compens credit risk term premia cost origin screen monitor loan need compens necessarili fall polici rate lower anyth central bank lower rate economi need stimulus precis difficult bank find good loan make opportun remain seen whether extent recent monetari polici accommod translat cheaper bank lend anoth concern lower rate may contribut instabl financi sector valid concern practic causal chain difficult establish low rate realli lead instabl e g though excess search yield rate low instabl financi system economi need stimulus said reduc excess risk avers financi market welcom side effect central bank polici crisi question whether risktak financi sector alreadi gone far contribut grow financi imbal frothi asset price valuat loos credit standard irrespect answer question given low inflat environ clear monetari polici cannot current assum role address concern euro area therefor task macroprudenti polici deal potenti financi imbal supervisori setup europ undergon signific improv help ensur sound financi system enter extend period low interest rate must stand readi use full extent new macroprudenti instrument nation compet author ecb entrust import aspect lower polici rate also reaffirm forward guidanc help clarifi ecb commit ensur monetari polici stanc remain appropri need euro area economi reflect eoniaoi curv flat negat territori matur three year reflect market expect negat eonia fix well slide widen gap expect path us euro area interest rate slide negat deposit rate howev also advers consequ start impos cost bank excess reserv could therefor reduc profit note howev appli reduct deposit rate make rate negat sure lower bank profit could hamper econom recoveri especi time bank deleverag own stricter regul enhanc market scrutini whether bank profit realli fall polici rate lower depend general slope yield curv bank fund cost may also fall bank invest polici scope diversifi cash invest along curv across credit univers factor drive noninterest incom fundament bank profit healthi economi household compani strive financ project accommod monetari polici aim achiev first place fact ensur smooth transmiss low polici rate cost credit economi support profit bank ultim depend whether econom polici euro area countri level success put euro area economi back path strong stabl growth mobilis supplysid avail demandsid instrument prudent wellcapitalis bank system need case ecb comprehens assess togeth start singl supervisori mechan key respect order avoid cost excess reserv bank may also decid borrow less ecb would reduc excess liquid bank system put upward pressur interest rate interbank bond market could counteract reduct polici rate seen far despit discuss advers consequ negat deposit rate signific impact function money market alreadi mention smooth transmiss rate stabl trade volum eonia similar level excess liquid amount deposit ecb slide larg unaffect howev one possibl reason stabl level money market function could declin still exist fragment money market lot achiev exampl target imbal fallen near half sinc peak mid bn septemb bn peak level reach juli market fragment euro area still present bank excess reserv predomin high profit bank locat nonstress countri potenti advers effect bank profit may less concern financi stabil perspect similar bank good reason borrow ecb instanc sourc fund avail bank borrow necessarili deposit ecb excess liquid bank system may fall impact negat rate market fragment euro area evid actual money market transact show fragment still signific hamper smooth transmiss lower rate across euro area bank locat nonstress countri borrow overnight unsecur market negat rate rate borrow locat stress countri most posit distribut rate wide rang slight negat slight main refinanc rate said evid lower rate reduc fragment secur market search yield low rate environ increas demand higher yield still safe product repo sovereign bond includ noncor countri higher demand push thus compress interest rate secur market let conclud given theoret argument lower polici rate negat territori given practic experi far verdict come back opinion gesel consid prophet monetari crank final verdict certain still base present evid far seem fair say lower polici rate deposit rate move negat territori provid appropri monetari polici stimulus euro area economi comfort forward guidanc ecb contribut reduct market fragment without advers impact function money market money market settl negat territori market segment start experienc negat yield make sure broader market communiti prepar cope new environ thank attent would like thank florian heider contribut present opinion express remain mine ecb dg market oper summari discuss money market contact group june avail ecb websit earli discuss see also cœuré b central bank challeng lower bound intervent meet financi crisi host initi global market univers chicago booth school busi miami februari mankiw g may time fed go negat new york time april see also w buiter negat interest rate come central bank near may see ilgmann c m menner negat nomin rate histori current propos intern econom econom polici see also gesel natur econom order london peter owen ltd fisher stamp script new york adelphi stamp banknot famous tri citi wörgl austria bill introduc devalu rate per month unless holder would buy stamp extend nomin valu see champ b stamp script money peopl paid use econom commentari feder reserv bank cleveland april beyond direct opportun cost move deposit rate deepli negat territori may involv indirect cost depend abil bank pass custom particular retail one schmiedel h kostova g w ruttenberg social privat cost retail payment instrument european perspect ecb occasion paper seri rogoff k cost benefit phase paper currenc nber work paper earli explicit analysi rational newkeynesian model see buiter w n panigirtzoglou overcom zero bound nomin interest rate negat interest currenc gesel solut econom journal woodford m monetari polici inform economi paper present feder reserv bank kansa citi econom symposium jackson hole august septemb review impact nonstandard monetari polici money market function see monnet c m bech impact unconvent monetari polici overnight interbank market reserv bank australia annual confer volum liquid fund market recent review bank lend channel monetari polici transmiss special focus crisi experi see gambacorta l d marquesibanez bank lend channel lesson crisi bis work paper causal evid lower interest rate lead risktak bank see jimenez g peydro j ongena j saurina hazard time monetari polici million loan say impact monetari polici credit risktak econometrica forthcom evid lower interest rate environ unit state advers affect money market fund see kacperczyk m m di maggio unintend consequ zero lower bound polici work paper columbia busi school howev less concern europ money market fund central financi system inform see ecb report financi integr europ april accord latest icma survey septemb repo market size increas last month eur billion eur billion reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en