Jean-Claude Trichet: Reflections on EMU,13-11-2010,European Central Bank,ECB,2897,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,I would like to thank the organisers for inviting me to speak here today. This is a crucial time for the European economy and for the global economy. Vital debates about the state of and interactions between the world’s major economies have been taking place at the G20 meetings of Ministers and Governors a few weeks ago and at the G20 summit in Seoul yesterday. Within Europe, there is a particularly vital debate about the framework of governance for Economic and Monetary Union. Both debates touch on the importance in these challenging times for the design of appropriate policies. Throughout the global crisis, we have all striven to avoid a repeat of the economic policy disasters of the 1930s – and to foster a close cooperation between policy-makers around the world. Working together towards a common goal must continue to guide our actions. Today, I would like to put some of the key issues into a broader context.First, I will focus on the experience of economic and monetary union in Europe. Second, I will briefly describe the origins and impact of the financial crisis and outline how the European Central Bank (ECB) has responded to the crisis. And finally, I will touch on the current economic situation and conclude with the key challenges that lie ahead of us in achieving an effective economic governance policy in Europe.Let me begin with price developments. The quality of a currency is reflected in its value. As you know, this is what in German is called Geldwertstabilität. There is one single benchmark to measure such stability within an economy and that is the degree of price stability or, expressed the other way around, the rate of inflation. As the guardian of price stability for the euro area, the ECB has set itself a very clear numerical benchmark to measure the degree of price stability. It has defined price stability to be an annual rate of inflation of consumer prices in the euro area of below, but close to 2%, over the medium term - that is, over an average of several years. We now have almost 12 years of experience with the euro – enough time to judge whether the ECB has been successful in delivering its mandate. Over these 12 years, the average annual inflation rate in the euro area has been 1.97%. We have achieved price stability in the euro area over what has already been quite a long horizon. It is the best result of any of the larger countries in the euro area for at least 50 years. The conditions for achieving price stability have not always been easy. In 1999, we began with a completely new institution – the ECB –, a new currency – the euro – and a new framework for monetary policy-making. Over the years we had to cope with highly volatile developments in many components of the consumption basket – including oil prices of up to $145 per barrel – considerable variations in exchange rates, and the burst of the internet bubble, to name but a few. Hence, the track record, with 12 years of price stability, is worth to take note of. For Germany, the inflation rate has been even lower than the average in the euro area over the past 12 years: 1.5% per year on average from 1999 to September 2010. By comparison, the average rate of inflation in Germany in the 1990s prior to the introduction of the euro was 2.2%. In the 1980s, it was 2.8% and in the 1970s 4.9%. If the strength of a currency is measured by the degree at which it preserves purchasing power, the euro is stronger than the most stable currency that preceded its inception. Not stark wie die D-Mark but stärker als die D-Mark is the right characterisation of the euro in a historical context. The second element that is important for the solidity of a currency is its external value. The reason is simple: a significant and persistent depreciation over time will ultimately lead to higher import prices and hence inflation. Therefore, abstracting from the large swings that foreign exchange markets are known for at times, over a longer period the exchange rate is an important ingredient in shaping domestic inflation outcomes. In 1999, the euro was introduced at an exchange rate of 1.18 vis-à-vis the US dollar. You know what is its value today. It needs no further commentary.But the euro is more than this. It is the uniting monetary element of no fewer than 16 countries that together form a monetary and economic area of 330 million citizens. It has contributed to a further integration of Europe’s economies and I do not forget that as soon as 1 January next year we will be 17 countries and more than 330 million fellow citizens. But as its name indicates, our Economic and Monetary union rests on two pillars: an economic pillar and a monetary pillar. The fundamental concepts of the monetary pillar are the full independence of the ECB and its crystal clear mandate to pursue price stability in the euro area.The fundamental concepts of the economic pillar can be summarised as follows: first, the need to determine macroeconomic policies in line with the rules governing the participation in a monetary union that is based on price stability; and second, the need to set fiscal policies in line with the requirements as laid out in the Stability and Growth pact. I have already described the contribution of the monetary pillar. Unfortunately, the contribution of the economic pillar is at times much less flattering. Much of the problems we face today see their origins in insufficient discipline of fiscal policy makers and an inappropriate setting of macroeconomic policies. For several years, fiscal policies in many countries have not been in line with the letter and the spirit of the Stability and Growth pact. The pact calls for balanced budgets over the cycle, maximum deficits of 3% and a debt level of below 60%. When a few years ago it became clear that fiscal policies would not be able to meet the rules of the Stability and Growth pact, it was not policies that were changed but the pact. In 2004 and 2005, several heads of states and governments were actively trying to dismantle the Stability and Growth pact. One of the countries in the lead of these endeavours was Germany. It was supported by France as well as other countries. It was a very fierce battle at the time, and the ECB voiced publicly its grave concerns. The second area of policy slippage concerns macroeconomic policies. In a monetary union, national developments in prices and costs have to take account of the fact that the union is a union of monetary stability. Therefore, national price and costs developments significantly higher than the union average entail significant losses over time in competitiveness that are painful to reverse. By the same token, fiscal and structural policies – including appropriate supervisory policies (today we would say macroprudential policies) – need to keep domestic demand and credit growth in line with rates of sustainable growth and price stability. Otherwise, booms and busts are the inevitable consequence. Both areas, fiscal and macroeconomic policies, are monitored by the peers, supported mainly by the Commission. The Eurogroup and Ecofin meetings of finance ministers are the fora for such peer monitoring. Of course, effective monitoring requires adherence by members to the policy framework, it requires peer pressure and consequences to deal with deviant behaviour and it requires reliable statistics. It is in these areas that the biggest deficiencies have been revealed. Fiscal policy conduct has quite often not been in line with the pact, macroeconomic policies have been too loose and peer pressure has been too weak. These problems were visible well before the financial crisis, but the crisis has of course aggravated them, and massively so.I will come back to how we deal with these problems in a moment. But first let me turn directly to the crisis and say a few words about its origins and developments, and how the ECB has responded to it.Robert Merton – one of the architects of modern financial theory – once said that: “Any virtue can readily become a vice if taken to excess, and just so with innovations”. [1] There is unlikely to be a more compelling proof of this dictum than the developments in financial innovation that led up to the crisis that started in 2007 and became most acute in the autumn of 2008.Historically, the financial industry has been at the forefront of economic progress because of its ability to offer funding to those who take on economic risk. Without credit, the innovation, production and trade of the real economy are severely constrained. But in the recent past the focus of finance has gradually shifted. From helping the real economy manage economic risk, the focus of finance has quietly moved toward the creation of financial risk. Financial risk is different from economic risk. It is deliberate exposure to expected asset price changes. Building exposure to changes in the value of an asset is not bad per se. But we have to distinguish between arbitrage and directional positioning. Arbitrage is an essential market force. Indirectly, it supports production and trade. Directional positioning, instead, can amplify and even create gaps in asset prices. It does so by acting on expectations of future price changes. Unlike in the case of arbitrage, these price gaps are notional – indeed, “speculative”. They are often large only because they are not suitably discounted for risk. When on 15 September 2008, Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy, the turmoil that had started a year earlier turned into an avalanche. In times of financial panic, banks and other financial intermediaries shed risky and illiquid investments and rush to liquidity. In the process, banks’ intermediation is reduced, and loans to companies are curtailed. If the process is allowed to unfold in a disorderly manner, it can create severe damage for borrowers and for the broader economy. The ECB was among the first central banks in the world to recognise the severity of the situation as early as August 2007, when the turmoil began. It took actions well before a number of other central banks – to be precise: on the very first day the turmoil erupted. As the failure of Lehman precipitated the acute phase of the crisis, the ECB acted decisively, taking several measures to protect against a disorderly correction in credit and liquidity conditions for the euro area. We put banks in a position to maintain their crucial role in the financing of the real economy. Fears of a “Kreditklemme” have not materialised. At the same time, we could start to phase out some of these measures and reduce the amount and duration of liquidity provision. A few months ago, in May 2010, the ECB decided on bold measures again. It was for similar reasons. Increasing market concerns about the sustainability of public finances led to a paralysis in the secondary market for government paper. Once more, private financial intermediation was threatened. With the rapid increase in secured interbank lending in the euro area over the past years, the impact on money markets of developments in government bond markets has grown substantially. Government bonds have traditionally been an important element in the transmission process because they serve as a benchmark, or floor, for the pricing of other financial contracts and fixed-income securities. In recent years they have also emerged as a prime source of collateral in interbank lending. As a result abrupt changes in the value or availability of these securities can imply a sharp deterioration in banks’ funding conditions – with adverse effects on both the supply of bank loans to the real economy and their prices.Therefore, we had to determine further non-standard measures, including interventions in debt markets. All our non-standard measures help restoring a more normal monetary policy transmission mechanism which is necessary to fulfil our primary mandate of accomplishing price stability in the medium term. It is not to be confused with ‘quantitative easing’ policies that aim to reduce longer-term interest rates by expanding the monetary base. In fact, all Eurosystem purchases of debt securities are fully sterilised by conducting liquidity-absorbing operations. All our non-standard measures are temporary in nature. That being said we urge all governments to step up consolidation. There is a clear need to strengthen public confidence in the capacity of governments to return to sustainable public finances and thus support sustainable growth over the medium term. To this end, it is essential that countries pursue credible multi-year consolidation plans and fully implement the planned consolidation measures. Any positive fiscal developments that may emerge, reflecting factors such as a more favourable than expected economic environment, should be exploited to make faster progress with fiscal consolidation. Let me come to the third and final part of my remarks and turn to the latest developments in the euro area economy. Looking ahead, our quantitative definition of price stability and our medium-term orientation significantly reduce the likelihood of either deflation or inflation scares. The firm anchoring of inflation expectations – throughout a time of crisis – meant that we could maintain the rate on our refinancing operations at positive levels without having any materialisation of a deflationary risk or inflationary expectations. Indeed, recent data releases and survey evidence confirm our view that expected price developments will remain moderate over the policy-relevant medium-term horizon. At the same time, the positive underlying momentum of the economic recovery in the euro area remains in place. In line with previous expectations, this implies continuing real GDP growth in the second half of this year. The global recovery is expected to proceed, and this should imply a continued positive impact on the demand for euro area exports. Private sector domestic demand should also contribute to growth, supported by the accommodative monetary policy stance and the measures adopted to restore the functioning of the financial system. But complacency would be inappropriate. The European leaders recognise that our economic model is in need of a considerable strengthening. At their meeting in October, the Heads of State or Government agreed on the reform of the system of economic governance. The proposals put forward by President Van Rompuy represent a strengthening of the existing framework for fiscal and macroeconomic surveillance. But as I have said before, the Governing Council of the ECB considers that they do not represent the quantum leap in the economic governance that is needed to be fully commensurate with the monetary union we have created.One key area is surveillance of fiscal policies to prevent excessive deficits and unsustainable public debt. In our view we need shorter deadlines under excessive deficit procedures so that corrective policy action is taken in good time. We need quasi-automaticity in the application of sanctions, based on clearly defined criteria and with less discretion over outcomes. And we need ambitious targets for the reduction of public debt towards the 60% of GDP ceiling. The second key area is broader surveillance of macroeconomic policies in the euro area. We need a new system of mutual surveillance in the euro area, concentrating firmly on euro area countries experiencing sustained losses of competitiveness and large current account deficits as these countries face the greatest sustainability challenges. It should be determined by transparent and effective trigger mechanisms and specify clearly the sanctions in case of breach. And we need full transparency. The assessments of macroeconomic imbalances and recommendations for corrective action should be given broad publicity at all stages of the surveillance process. The effectiveness of these enhancements to the governance framework will in part be determined by the quality and independence of the economic analysis that underpins them. Without reliable statistical data we cannot be certain that the governance framework will provide the quantum leap forward that is necessary. It is therefore extremely important that the Commission services charged with conducting macroeconomic and fiscal surveillance for the euro area be sufficiently independent, ideally supported by a body of “wise persons” providing external assessments.Let me conclude. The past 12 years have been very challenging, demanding and eventful years. The ECB has lived up to its responsibility and delivered what we promised to deliver: a stable currency, as credible and confidence-inspiring as the best previous currencies. The euro has also been a force of stability in what is now a more than three year period of economic and financial instability.As is the case in all major advanced economies which all, without exception, have to put under sharp review their previous surveillance framework and economic models, changes are needed in the euro area framework. Not the kind of changes towards more unilateral action, with dangers of lack of cooperation, but changes towards greater cooperation, greater cohesion through a strengthened framework of economic governance. To sum up, more European unity, more responsible European unity. We must keep our sense of direction.We are now at a stage where we need to remain bold and enact those reforms that we envisaged when the crisis was at its deepest. It was then that we witnessed the clearest manifestation of risks and our judgement was sharpest. It would be a big mistake if, with gradually improving conditions, we fell back into accepting the status quo. I therefore call on all parties to remain as bold in their reforms as they were when we were in the eye of the storm.Thank you for your attention.[1]See Merton (1992). Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen would like thank organis invit speak today crucial time european economi global economi vital debat state interact world major economi take place g meet minist governor week ago g summit seoul yesterday within europ particular vital debat framework govern econom monetari union debat touch import challeng time design appropri polici throughout global crisi striven avoid repeat econom polici disast foster close cooper policymak around world work togeth toward common goal must continu guid action today would like put key issu broader context first focus experi econom monetari union europ second briefli describ origin impact financi crisi outlin european central bank ecb respond crisi final touch current econom situat conclud key challeng lie ahead us achiev effect econom govern polici europ let begin price develop qualiti currenc reflect valu know german call geldwertstabilität one singl benchmark measur stabil within economi degre price stabil express way around rate inflat guardian price stabil euro area ecb set clear numer benchmark measur degre price stabil defin price stabil annual rate inflat consum price euro area close medium term averag sever year almost year experi euro enough time judg whether ecb success deliv mandat year averag annual inflat rate euro area achiev price stabil euro area alreadi quit long horizon best result larger countri euro area least year condit achiev price stabil alway easi began complet new institut ecb new currenc euro new framework monetari policymak year cope high volatil develop mani compon consumpt basket includ oil price per barrel consider variat exchang rate burst internet bubbl name henc track record year price stabil worth take note germani inflat rate even lower averag euro area past year per year averag septemb comparison averag rate inflat germani prior introduct euro strength currenc measur degre preserv purchas power euro stronger stabl currenc preced incept stark wie die dmark stärker al die dmark right characteris euro histor context second element import solid currenc extern valu reason simpl signific persist depreci time ultim lead higher import price henc inflat therefor abstract larg swing foreign exchang market known time longer period exchang rate import ingredi shape domest inflat outcom euro introduc exchang rate visàvi us dollar know valu today need commentari euro unit monetari element fewer countri togeth form monetari econom area million citizen contribut integr europ economi forget soon januari next year countri million fellow citizen name indic econom monetari union rest two pillar econom pillar monetari pillar fundament concept monetari pillar full independ ecb crystal clear mandat pursu price stabil euro area fundament concept econom pillar summaris follow first need determin macroeconom polici line rule govern particip monetari union base price stabil second need set fiscal polici line requir laid stabil growth pact alreadi describ contribut monetari pillar unfortun contribut econom pillar time much less flatter much problem face today see origin insuffici disciplin fiscal polici maker inappropri set macroeconom polici sever year fiscal polici mani countri line letter spirit stabil growth pact pact call balanc budget cycl maximum deficit debt level year ago becam clear fiscal polici would abl meet rule stabil growth pact polici chang pact sever head state govern activ tri dismantl stabil growth pact one countri lead endeavour germani support franc well countri fierc battl time ecb voic public grave concern second area polici slippag concern macroeconom polici monetari union nation develop price cost take account fact union union monetari stabil therefor nation price cost develop signific higher union averag entail signific loss time competit pain revers token fiscal structur polici includ appropri supervisori polici today would say macroprudenti polici need keep domest demand credit growth line rate sustain growth price stabil otherwis boom bust inevit consequ area fiscal macroeconom polici monitor peer support main commiss eurogroup ecofin meet financ minist fora peer monitor cours effect monitor requir adher member polici framework requir peer pressur consequ deal deviant behaviour requir reliabl statist area biggest defici reveal fiscal polici conduct quit often line pact macroeconom polici loos peer pressur weak problem visibl well financi crisi crisi cours aggrav massiv come back deal problem moment first let turn direct crisi say word origin develop ecb respond robert merton one architect modern financi theori said virtu readili becom vice taken excess innov unlik compel proof dictum develop financi innov led crisi start becam acut autumn histor financi industri forefront econom progress abil offer fund take econom risk without credit innov product trade real economi sever constrain recent past focus financ gradual shift help real economi manag econom risk focus financ quiet move toward creation financi risk financi risk differ econom risk deliber exposur expect asset price chang build exposur chang valu asset bad per se distinguish arbitrag direct posit arbitrag essenti market forc indirect support product trade direct posit instead amplifi even creat gap asset price act expect futur price chang unlik case arbitrag price gap notion inde specul often larg suitabl discount risk septemb lehman brother file bankruptci turmoil start year earlier turn avalanch time financi panic bank financi intermediari shed riski illiquid invest rush liquid process bank intermedi reduc loan compani curtail process allow unfold disord manner creat sever damag borrow broader economi ecb among first central bank world recognis sever situat earli august turmoil began took action well number central bank precis first day turmoil erupt failur lehman precipit acut phase crisi ecb act decis take sever measur protect disord correct credit liquid condit euro area put bank posit maintain crucial role financ real economi fear kreditklemm materialis time could start phase measur reduc amount durat liquid provis month ago may ecb decid bold measur similar reason increas market concern sustain public financ led paralysi secondari market govern paper privat financi intermedi threaten rapid increas secur interbank lend euro area past year impact money market develop govern bond market grown substanti govern bond tradit import element transmiss process serv benchmark floor price financi contract fixedincom secur recent year also emerg prime sourc collater interbank lend result abrupt chang valu avail secur impli sharp deterior bank fund condit advers effect suppli bank loan real economi price therefor determin nonstandard measur includ intervent debt market nonstandard measur help restor normal monetari polici transmiss mechan necessari fulfil primari mandat accomplish price stabil medium term confus quantit eas polici aim reduc longerterm interest rate expand monetari base fact eurosystem purchas debt secur fulli sterilis conduct liquidityabsorb oper nonstandard measur temporari natur said urg govern step consolid clear need strengthen public confid capac govern return sustain public financ thus support sustain growth medium term end essenti countri pursu credibl multiyear consolid plan fulli implement plan consolid measur posit fiscal develop may emerg reflect factor favour expect econom environ exploit make faster progress fiscal consolid let come third final part remark turn latest develop euro area economi look ahead quantit definit price stabil mediumterm orient signific reduc likelihood either deflat inflat scare firm anchor inflat expect throughout time crisi meant could maintain rate refinanc oper posit level without materialis deflationari risk inflationari expect inde recent data releas survey evid confirm view expect price develop remain moder policyrelev mediumterm horizon time posit under momentum econom recoveri euro area remain place line previous expect impli continu real gdp growth second half year global recoveri expect proceed impli continu posit impact demand euro area export privat sector domest demand also contribut growth support accommod monetari polici stanc measur adopt restor function financi system complac would inappropri european leader recognis econom model need consider strengthen meet octob head state govern agre reform system econom govern propos put forward presid van rompuy repres strengthen exist framework fiscal macroeconom surveil said govern council ecb consid repres quantum leap econom govern need fulli commensur monetari union creat one key area surveil fiscal polici prevent excess deficit unsustain public debt view need shorter deadlin excess deficit procedur correct polici action taken good time need quasiautomat applic sanction base clear defin criteria less discret outcom need ambiti target reduct public debt toward gdp ceil second key area broader surveil macroeconom polici euro area need new system mutual surveil euro area concentr firm euro area countri experienc sustain loss competit larg current account deficit countri face greatest sustain challeng determin transpar effect trigger mechan specifi clear sanction case breach need full transpar assess macroeconom imbal recommend correct action given broad public stage surveil process effect enhanc govern framework part determin qualiti independ econom analysi underpin without reliabl statist data cannot certain govern framework provid quantum leap forward necessari therefor extrem import commiss servic charg conduct macroeconom fiscal surveil euro area suffici independ ideal support bodi wise person provid extern assess let conclud past year challeng demand event year ecb live respons deliv promis deliv stabl currenc credibl confidenceinspir best previous currenc euro also forc stabil three year period econom financi instabl case major advanc economi without except put sharp review previous surveil framework econom model chang need euro area framework kind chang toward unilater action danger lack cooper chang toward greater cooper greater cohes strengthen framework econom govern sum european uniti respons european uniti must keep sens direct stage need remain bold enact reform envisag crisi deepest wit clearest manifest risk judgement sharpest would big mistak gradual improv condit fell back accept status quo therefor call parti remain bold reform eye storm thank attent see merton reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en