Peter Praet: The (changing) role of central banks in financial stability policies,10-11-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,2560,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen, [1]More than four years have passed since the onset of the financial crisis. Over these years, central banking functions have been stretched to the limits.Recent developments demonstrate how fragile our financial system remains, not only because of debt legacy but more worrisome because of its mere design.The public debt crisis in a number of advanced economies is also raising fundamental questions about the role of public debt instruments in our financial system.Looking backwards, one can say that disciplining mechanisms in debt markets have clearly failed, often as a result of mutually reinforcing market and government failures. Too much debt in the public sector is the symptom of both ineffective public governance and market discipline. Budget rules, such as the no-bail-out provision of the Maastricht Treaty, didn’t contain the accumulation of debt. In the banking sector, the disciplining role of sight-deposits has proven to be time-inconsistent in the presence of the negative externalities that the failure of a large institution would create. Although the role of monetary policy in the build up of the crisis is still debated, it does influence in an important way the price of leverage. [2]Lack of attention and preparedness to tail-events has been particularly striking. While central banks have always paid attention to the possibility of extreme events in payments and post-trade infrastructures, too little efforts have been devoted to the prevention of the conditions under which emergency liquidity assistance would be provided to the financial sector. Other authorities were concerned, such as supervisors at the micro-level and ministries of finance. The necessity of constructive “ambiguity” was also invoked to keep a low profile.Achieving and preserving financial stability has now become a key policy objective in our societies. Building up separate macroprudential policy functions is considered one of the main elements of the wide ranging policy reforms in pursuit of this objective. The idea is to entrust the authority in charge of macroprudential policy with the task of monitoring, identifying and mitigating systemic risks as they emerge. Macroprudential policy, by taking a system-wide perspective, thereby complements microprudential policy which is mainly oriented towards ensuring the health of individual institutions or markets. But the way to organise the macroprudential function is still work in progress in particular on the role of central banks. There are different views on how to design such a framework and how they should relate to central banks, their governance structures and their monetary policy strategies. [3] This is essentially related not only to the difficulty to define financial stability in an operational way (contrary to price stability), but also to the number of authorities concerned (central banks, bank supervisors, insurance supervisors, market supervisors, competition authorities, consumer protection authorities, Ministries of Finance, Ministry of Justice, resolution authorities) and to the variety of possible tools often assigned to several objectives. Central banks should undoubtedly assume important roles in macroprudential policies. Central banks bring in essential expertise in analysing financial systems from an aggregate perspective. They also have proper incentives to mitigate systemic risk ex ante since central banks typically have to deal with the fallout from financial crises. Last but not least, involving central banks in macroprudential policy should foster effective coordination between monetary policy and financial stability policies in a manner that preserves their autonomy. Policy coordination is likely to become important in light of the strong mutual interdependencies between the financial and the real sectors and thereby between both policy functions. I will come back to policy coordination later on.A wide range of different approaches exist to institutionalise central banks’ role in the new financial stability frameworks. The different approaches taken largely respond to country-specific circumstances. A “one size fits all” approach simply doesn’t exist. This is also in the European Union where individual countries have adopted different approaches.At the level of the European Union as a whole, a new financial supervisory architecture became operational at the beginning of 2011. It includes three new European supervisory authorities (ESAs) for banking, insurance and securities markets – which aim to strengthen micro-prudential supervision – and the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) responsible for macroprudential oversight. The ECB ensures the Secretariat function for the ESRB - without prejudice to the principle of central bank independence -, and is also in charge of providing analytical, statistical, administrative and logistical support to this new EU body. Moreover, central bankers hold the majority in the ESRB’s decision-making body, the General Board. [4] The main tasks of the ESRB are to monitor and assess systemic risk and to issue warnings and, where necessary, recommendations to the relevant policy-makers which are not legally binding but depend on the principle of “comply or explain”.However, the ECB’s contribution to achieving and maintaining financial stability does not rely exclusively on its responsibilities for an effective functioning of the ESRB. Obviously, the way the ECB conducts monetary policy also impacts on financial stability. Some people call for vast changes in central banks’ institutional setup and their monetary policy strategies with a view to pursue price stability and financial stability as coequal objectives. In my view, by contrast, major changes in the institutional and strategic framework of monetary policy are not necessary. But business as usual in central banking will not do it either. Business as usual would imply adhering to what has become known as the “Jackson Hole consensus”. According to this pre-crisis consensus view, central banks should only respond to asset prices and financial imbalances to the extent that they affect the shorter term inflation forecast. [5] If financial imbalances still emerged, central banks should follow a “mop up” or “cleaning” strategy after the burst of the bubble. Maintaining price stability is simply the best central banks could do to contribute to financial stability. This view implied a strict separation between monetary policy and financial stability policy. Central banks had been well aware of the importance of financial stability for the smooth conduct of monetary policy and of their varied responsibilities in ensuring financial stability on the other hand. Yet, the importance of the possible implications of financial imbalances were underestimated and not systematically integrated in the analytical apparatus supporting monetary policy. This flaw in the intellectual underpinning misled central banks to downplay their financial stability functions and supported the general view that monetary and microprudential policy can be conducted separately, with monetary policy instruments geared towards achieving macroeconomic stability, and financial regulation and supervision aimed at preserving financial stability in the spirit of Tinbergen’s policy assignment rule. [6] However, it has become clear by now that this strictly dichotomous view is flawed since monetary policy and financial stability policy are intrinsically linked to each other, given the powerful interactions between financial and economic conditions. As the recent crisis forcefully demonstrated, the previous mainly microprudential orientation of financial regulation and supervision proved unable to curb the tendency of the ever more complex and opaque financial system to generate excessive amounts of systemic risk. The unravelling of the associated financial imbalances brought about the biggest financial and economic disaster since WWII which, in turn, severely impacted on the conduct of monetary policy. As the monetary policy transmission mechanisms were affected, central banks had to take unconventional measures.The crisis also taught us that “cleaning” rather than “leaning” against financial imbalances can simply become too costly to be ignored ex ante. In addition, we also learned not to underestimate the moral hazard associated with the asymmetry in the previous consensus view of monetary policy.In the light of the obvious breakdown of the Jackson Hole consensus, the view has become more popular that under certain circumstances, central banks may be well advised to actively lean against the emergence of financial imbalances in order to mitigate systemic risk and the associated longer term risks to price stability and economic welfare. [7] At the ECB, we have always emphasised one tool which helps us maintain a medium to long-run orientation: the “monetary analysis”. The monetary analysis is one element of the ECB’s two-pillar framework – in addition to the economic analysis - for the regular assessment of risks to price stability. But we have always foreseen that monitoring monetary and credit developments is also part of an overall framework for addressing asset price misalignments. The analysis of low-frequency trends in money and credit developments has always been associated with the emergence of imbalances, because it allows us to assess risks to price stability well beyond the typical shorter term forecast horizons. This notwithstanding, for what concerns the monetary policy strategy, significant efforts are still to be undertaken in building up an appropriate analytical framework linking the various sources of systemic risk to economic outcomes over long policy horizons. This may robustify the ECB’s two-pillar monetary policy strategy to better cope with risks of highly uncertain, low probability but very costly events such as financial crises. A better understanding of the transmission channels that exist between the financial and the real sectors is therefore of the essence. While some headway has been made in studying non-conventional transmissions channels such as the risk-taking channel, other issues still remain work in progress. [8] For example what is the influence of interest rates on risk tolerance? What is the interrelation between funding and market liquidity? What are the determinants of the leverage cycle, and which role is played by financial innovation? Given the complexity of the issues involved one has to admit that the development of an operational framework linking monetary policy to the various forms of systemic risk is extremely complicated and poses severe intellectual challenges. Financial stability risks may also arise from excessive monetary policy activism geared toward buying insurance against adverse macroeconomic and/or financial stability conditions. For instance, central banks might threaten future economic and financial stability if they keep policy rates too low for too long in the aftermath of a crisis. [9] In the context of the present crisis, the risk of missing the right time to exit from unconventional monetary policy measures offers a case in point.In the light of these insights, it should be clear that monetary policy cannot do it alone. Financial stability should mainly be pursued by microprudential and macroprudential policies [10]. Also, in order to achieve price and financial stability a pairing of appropriate policies by all relevant authorities is indispensable. One avenue might be to give an agent the specific mandate to assess the financial stability impact of regulatory and tax changes when relevant.However, policy coordination is in general not easy. Coordination might be impaired by problems of time inconsistency when the objective functions of the authorities involved may differ. For instance, governments may succumb to the temptation to respond to electoral pressures or lobbying activities from the financial industry. A macroprudential authority might also be endowed with too much discretion in its instrument setting. These potential policy failures may therefore favour a more rules-based approach towards the macroprudential policy. This applies both to policy tools addressing the time dimension of financial stability (like counter-cyclical capital requirements or loan-to-value ratios) and tools relating to the cross-section dimension (like surcharges for SIFIs, leverage ratios, bank merger and acquisition policy, limits to business organisation, etc.). As the financial system is highly adaptive one has to be aware that only controlling the time dimension of financial stability is not sufficient. For example, similar rates of asset price inflation in the real estate markets may not imply similar risks to financial stability even when occurring at similar points in the financial cycle. A proper assessment of systemic risk always requires a thorough analysis of borrower and lender fragilities as well as of the whole intermediation process. Policy coordination is also particularly challenging in a currency union when credit cycles (eg. real estate cycle) are not synchronized. Moreover, monetary integration in the European Monetary Union has advanced at a much higher pace than the integration of financial stability and fiscal policies. An important step forward was allowing the ESRB to make country-specific recommendations but a further strengthening of its powers might still be needed.To conclude, challenges are immense both on the technical side as well as on the governance side to safeguard financial stability. In essence, the task consists in reinforcing disciplining mechanisms in private and public debt markets. There is a need to act in a number of areas. Central banks have an important role to play as coordinator/ facilitator/ initiator. They also have the proper incentives to do so in order not to overburden monetary policy.[1]I would like to thank Manfred Kremer and Oreste Tristani for their contributions to the preparation of this keynote speech.[2]See Adrain, T. and H.S. Shin (2011), “Financial intermediaries and monetary economics”, in: B. M. Friedman and M. Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, Vol. 3A, Elsevier.[3]See Nier, E., J. Osinkski, L.I. Jacome and P. Madrid (2011), “Institutional models for macroprudential policy”, IMF Staff Discussion Note, SDN/11/18, November and also Eichengreen, B. et al. (2011): “Rethinking central banking”, Committee on International Economic Policy and Reform, September.[4]The General Board consists of the following members with voting rights: the President and the Vice-President of the European Central Bank (ECB); the Governors of the national central banks of the Member States; one member of the European Commission; the Chairperson of the European Banking Authority (EBA); the Chairperson of the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA); the Chairperson of the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA); the Chair and the two Vice-Chairs of the Advisory Scientific Committee (ASC) of the ESRB; the Chair of the Advisory Technical Committee (ATC) of the ESRB; and the following members without voting rights: one high-level representative per Member State of the competent national supervisory authorities (the respective high-level representatives shall rotate depending on the item discussed, unless the national supervisory authorities of a particular member State have agreed on a common representative), and the President of the Economic and Financial Committee (EFC) of the Ecofin, which is the only representative of finance ministries.[5]See, for example, Bernanke and Gertler (1995) and the response by Cecchetti et al (2000).[6]See F. S. Mishkin (2010): “Monetary policy strategy: Lessons from the crisis”, Paper presented at the ECB Central Banking Conference, “Monetary policy revisited: Lessons from the crisis”, Frankfurt, November 18-19.[7]See, for example, Borio, C. (2011): “Central banking post-crisis: What compass for unchartered waters?”, BIS Working Paper No. 353, September.[8]For a recent overview see Adrain, T. and H.S. Shin (2011), “Financial intermediaries and monetary economics”, in: B. M. Friedman and M. Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, Vol. 3A, Elsevier.[9]See, for instance, Maddaloni, A. and Jose-Luis Peydro (2011), “Bank risk-taking, securitisation, supervision, and low interest rates: Evidence from the Euro-area and the U.S. lending standards”, Review of Financial Studies, Vol. 24, No. 6.[10]In fact, such a division of labour receives support from latest research conducted within the Macroprudential Research (MaRS) network of the European System of Central Banks. Under most circumstances it turns out that financial imbalances are better addressed by macroprudential policy measures (e.g., counter-cyclical loan-to-value ratios) rather than by a monetary policy “leaning against the wind”. See Beau, D., L. Clerc, and B. Mojon (2011): “Macro-prudential policy and the conduct of monetary policy”, Banque De France, Occasional Papers No. 8, and Lambertini, L., C. Mendicino, and M. T. Punzi (2011): “Leaning against boom-bust cycles in credit and housing prices”, Banco de Portugal, Working Paper 8/11.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen four year pass sinc onset financi crisi year central bank function stretch limit recent develop demonstr fragil financi system remain debt legaci worrisom mere design public debt crisi number advanc economi also rais fundament question role public debt instrument financi system look backward one say disciplin mechan debt market clear fail often result mutual reinforc market govern failur much debt public sector symptom ineffect public govern market disciplin budget rule nobailout provis maastricht treati didn contain accumul debt bank sector disciplin role sightdeposit proven timeinconsist presenc negat extern failur larg institut would creat although role monetari polici build crisi still debat influenc import way price leverag lack attent prepared tailev particular strike central bank alway paid attent possibl extrem event payment posttrad infrastructur littl effort devot prevent condit emerg liquid assist would provid financi sector author concern supervisor microlevel ministri financ necess construct ambigu also invok keep low profil achiev preserv financi stabil becom key polici object societi build separ macroprudenti polici function consid one main element wide rang polici reform pursuit object idea entrust author charg macroprudenti polici task monitor identifi mitig system risk emerg macroprudenti polici take systemwid perspect therebi complement microprudenti polici main orient toward ensur health individu institut market way organis macroprudenti function still work progress particular role central bank differ view design framework relat central bank govern structur monetari polici strategi essenti relat difficulti defin financi stabil oper way contrari price stabil also number author concern central bank bank supervisor insur supervisor market supervisor competit author consum protect author ministri financ ministri justic resolut author varieti possibl tool often assign sever object central bank undoubt assum import role macroprudenti polici central bank bring essenti expertis analys financi system aggreg perspect also proper incent mitig system risk ex ant sinc central bank typic deal fallout financi crise last least involv central bank macroprudenti polici foster effect coordin monetari polici financi stabil polici manner preserv autonomi polici coordin like becom import light strong mutual interdepend financi real sector therebi polici function come back polici coordin later wide rang differ approach exist institutionalis central bank role new financi stabil framework differ approach taken larg respond countryspecif circumst one size fit approach simpli doesn exist also european union individu countri adopt differ approach level european union whole new financi supervisori architectur becam oper begin includ three new european supervisori author esa bank insur secur market aim strengthen microprudenti supervis european system risk board esrb respons macroprudenti oversight ecb ensur secretariat function esrb without prejudic principl central bank independ also charg provid analyt statist administr logist support new eu bodi moreov central banker hold major esrb decisionmak bodi general board main task esrb monitor assess system risk issu warn necessari recommend relev policymak legal bind depend principl compli explain howev ecb contribut achiev maintain financi stabil reli exclus respons effect function esrb obvious way ecb conduct monetari polici also impact financi stabil peopl call vast chang central bank institut setup monetari polici strategi view pursu price stabil financi stabil coequal object view contrast major chang institut strateg framework monetari polici necessari busi usual central bank either busi usual would impli adher becom known jackson hole consensus accord precrisi consensus view central bank respond asset price financi imbal extent affect shorter term inflat forecast financi imbal still emerg central bank follow mop clean strategi burst bubbl maintain price stabil simpli best central bank could contribut financi stabil view impli strict separ monetari polici financi stabil polici central bank well awar import financi stabil smooth conduct monetari polici vari respons ensur financi stabil hand yet import possibl implic financi imbal underestim systemat integr analyt apparatus support monetari polici flaw intellectu underpin misl central bank downplay financi stabil function support general view monetari microprudenti polici conduct separ monetari polici instrument gear toward achiev macroeconom stabil financi regul supervis aim preserv financi stabil spirit tinbergen polici assign rule howev becom clear strict dichotom view flaw sinc monetari polici financi stabil polici intrins link given power interact financi econom condit recent crisi forc demonstr previous main microprudenti orient financi regul supervis prove unabl curb tendenc ever complex opaqu financi system generat excess amount system risk unravel associ financi imbal brought biggest financi econom disast sinc wwii turn sever impact conduct monetari polici monetari polici transmiss mechan affect central bank take unconvent measur crisi also taught us clean rather lean financi imbal simpli becom cost ignor ex ant addit also learn underestim moral hazard associ asymmetri previous consensus view monetari polici light obvious breakdown jackson hole consensus view becom popular certain circumst central bank may well advis activ lean emerg financi imbal order mitig system risk associ longer term risk price stabil econom welfar ecb alway emphasis one tool help us maintain medium longrun orient monetari analysi monetari analysi one element ecb twopillar framework addit econom analysi regular assess risk price stabil alway foreseen monitor monetari credit develop also part overal framework address asset price misalign analysi lowfrequ trend money credit develop alway associ emerg imbal allow us assess risk price stabil well beyond typic shorter term forecast horizon notwithstand concern monetari polici strategi signific effort still undertaken build appropri analyt framework link various sourc system risk econom outcom long polici horizon may robustifi ecb twopillar monetari polici strategi better cope risk high uncertain low probabl cost event financi crise better understand transmiss channel exist financi real sector therefor essenc headway made studi nonconvent transmiss channel risktak channel issu still remain work progress exampl influenc interest rate risk toler interrel fund market liquid determin leverag cycl role play financi innov given complex issu involv one admit develop oper framework link monetari polici various form system risk extrem complic pose sever intellectu challeng financi stabil risk may also aris excess monetari polici activ gear toward buy insur advers macroeconom andor financi stabil condit instanc central bank might threaten futur econom financi stabil keep polici rate low long aftermath crisi context present crisi risk miss right time exit unconvent monetari polici measur offer case point light insight clear monetari polici cannot alon financi stabil main pursu microprudenti macroprudenti polici also order achiev price financi stabil pair appropri polici relev author indispens one avenu might give agent specif mandat assess financi stabil impact regulatori tax chang relev howev polici coordin general easi coordin might impair problem time inconsist object function author involv may differ instanc govern may succumb temptat respond elector pressur lobbi activ financi industri macroprudenti author might also endow much discret instrument set potenti polici failur may therefor favour rulesbas approach toward macroprudenti polici appli polici tool address time dimens financi stabil like countercycl capit requir loantovalu ratio tool relat crosssect dimens like surcharg sifi leverag ratio bank merger acquisit polici limit busi organis etc financi system high adapt one awar control time dimens financi stabil suffici exampl similar rate asset price inflat real estat market may impli similar risk financi stabil even occur similar point financi cycl proper assess system risk alway requir thorough analysi borrow lender fragil well whole intermedi process polici coordin also particular challeng currenc union credit cycl eg real estat cycl synchron moreov monetari integr european monetari union advanc much higher pace integr financi stabil fiscal polici import step forward allow esrb make countryspecif recommend strengthen power might still need conclud challeng immens technic side well govern side safeguard financi stabil essenc task consist reinforc disciplin mechan privat public debt market need act number area central bank import role play coordin facilit initi also proper incent order overburden monetari polici would like thank manfr kremer orest tristani contribut prepar keynot speech see adrain h shin financi intermediari monetari econom b m friedman m woodford ed handbook monetari econom vol elsevi see nier e j osinkski l jacom p madrid institut model macroprudenti polici imf staff discuss note sdn novemb also eichengreen b et al rethink central bank committe intern econom polici reform septemb general board consist follow member vote right presid vicepresid european central bank ecb governor nation central bank member state one member european commiss chairperson european bank author eba chairperson european insur occup pension author eiopa chairperson european secur market author esma chair two vicechair advisori scientif committe asc esrb chair advisori technic committe atc esrb follow member without vote right one highlevel repres per member state compet nation supervisori author respect highlevel repres shall rotat depend item discuss unless nation supervisori author particular member state agre common repres presid econom financi committe efc ecofin repres financ ministri see exampl bernank gertler respons cecchetti et al see f mishkin monetari polici strategi lesson crisi paper present ecb central bank confer monetari polici revisit lesson crisi frankfurt novemb see exampl borio c central bank postcrisi compass unchart water bis work paper septemb recent overview see adrain h shin financi intermediari monetari econom b m friedman m woodford ed handbook monetari econom vol elsevi see instanc maddaloni joselui peydro bank risktak securitis supervis low interest rate evid euroarea u lend standard review financi studi vol fact divis labour receiv support latest research conduct within macroprudenti research mar network european system central bank circumst turn financi imbal better address macroprudenti polici measur e g countercycl loantovalu ratio rather monetari polici lean wind see beau d l clerc b mojon macroprudenti polici conduct monetari polici banqu de franc occasion paper lambertini l c mendicino m punzi lean boombust cycl credit hous price banco de portug work paper reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en