Jean-Claude Trichet: The handing over of the building permit for the new European Central Bank premises by the City of Frankfurt,06-05-2008,European Central Bank,ECB,935,"<p>Sehr geehrte Frau Oberbürgermeisterin Roth, sehr geehrte Damen und Herren,ich freue mich sehr, dass Sie, Frau Oberbürgermeisterin, mir heute persönlich die Baugenehmigung für unseren Neubau auf dem Gelände der ehemaligen Großmarkthalle überreichen. Für die EZB ist es ein besonderer Tag – die Erteilung der Baugenehmigung ist einer der wichtigsten Meilensteine auf dem Weg zur Errichtung des neuen Sitzes der Europäischen Zentralbank.This building permit provides us with formal approval for our architectural plans. We can now start implementing these plans, which have been under development for the past two years during the planning phase. The ECB sincerely welcomes the issuing of the permit, as it represents the culmination of all the hard work that has been done up to this point. We are very excited about the upcoming phase, that is, the start of the main construction work. As stimulating as the previous design phases were, they cannot possibly compare to the next stage, in which we will see the new ECB premises rise from the ground.I would like to take a moment now to reiterate some of the key features of our future premises. Let me start with the preservation of the Großmarkthalle. This important consideration has played a key role throughout the different stages of the project. At the ECB, we take particular pride in the fact that our efforts will enable this remarkable building – designed by the architect Martin Elsässer – to be preserved. In the course of the construction process, the concrete structure of the hall and the brick facades will be entirely renovated, while of course due attention will be paid to the guidelines of the monument preservation authorities. Over the past two years preservation experts have spent literally thousands of hours assessing the exact state of the building’s structure and the best methods to use for its preservation. The Großmarkthalle will not only be revitalised; it will also be fully integrated into our new premises. The combination of old and new, the former market hall and the new office towers, will create a unique building that will be easily recognisable not only in Frankfurt, but all over Europe and beyond. Another important element of our new building’s design is energy efficiency. The environmental design of the new premises is based on the EU Directive on the Energy Performance of Buildings. Our target for energy usage will be lower than the current German standards. Regenerative energies will be incorporated into the design wherever possible. Last, but not least, I would like to say a few words about the landscape design of the new premises. On completion, the landscaping will substantially increase the amount of green space in the area. Close cooperation with the city authorities has enabled an integrated design on the eastern boundary of the site, which means that the city’s green belt ( Frankfurter GrünGürtel) can be extended from the Ruhrorter Werft on the river out towards the Ostpark. The site of the new ECB premises will be secured in line with the security requirements of a modern central bank. Our security concept foresees physical components which will be integrated into the modulated landscape design and will not impair the view of the building. In this way, the Großmarkthalle will remain visible to its neighbours and those visiting the Ostend area.Let me now turn to the next steps to be taken in the construction of the new premises. As you know, we are currently carrying out the preliminary construction work, having received the required permit in February. In this context, the following work is currently being undertaken: Excavation work has begun for the basement of the office towers and the underground staff car park in the south of the site. The remaining ramp in the old railway delivery area and the two four-storey annex buildings at both ends of the Großmarkthalle are being removed. You may have noticed that the bricks that made up the external facade of the annex buildings are being removed by hand, one by one, since some of them will be reused for the renovation of the facade of the hall. If all goes well, the ECB will announce the general contractor which will carry out the main construction work for the new premises in autumn of this year. The company is currently being selected within the framework of a Europe-wide tender procedure.In January 2009, following the construction of the basement slab, the foundation stone is scheduled to be laid. (Frau Roth – we hope you will have some space for us in your diary?) At the same time, the renovation of the Großmarkthalle will get under way. If all goes as planned, we expect the building work to last around three years, with the building complex being finalised by the end of 2011. I would like to finish my introductory remarks by expressing my gratitude to the various authorities involved in this project. In particular, I would like to thank Frau Roth and all the staff of the Frankfurt city planning department for their commitment and efficient collaboration in this project, especially during the application process for this building permit. I can only agree with what was mentioned a moment ago: that the guidelines we received were precise and timely and the communication with the relevant authorities was very well organised. The speed with which our application was handled is further testimony to the excellent collaboration between our New ECB Premises project team and the city authorities.I thank you for your attention and am now at your disposal for questions. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",sehr geehrt frau oberbürgermeisterin roth sehr geehrt damen und herren ich freue mich sehr dass sie frau oberbürgermeisterin mir heut persönlich die baugenehmigung für unseren neubau auf dem geländ der ehemaligen großmarkthall überreichen für die ezb ist es ein besonder tag die erteilung der baugenehmigung ist einer der wichtigsten meilenstein auf dem weg zur errichtung des neuen sitz der europäischen zentralbank build permit provid us formal approv architectur plan start implement plan develop past two year plan phase ecb sincer welcom issu permit repres culmin hard work done point excit upcom phase start main construct work stimul previous design phase cannot possibl compar next stage see new ecb premis rise ground would like take moment reiter key featur futur premis let start preserv großmarkthall import consider play key role throughout differ stage project ecb take particular pride fact effort enabl remark build design architect elsässer preserv cours construct process concret structur hall brick facad entir renov cours due attent paid guidelin monument preserv author past two year preserv expert spent liter thousand hour assess exact state build structur best method use preserv großmarkthall revitalis also fulli integr new premis combin old new former market hall new offic tower creat uniqu build easili recognis frankfurt europ beyond anoth import element new build design energi effici environment design new premis base eu direct energi perform build target energi usag lower current german standard regen energi incorpor design wherev possibl last least would like say word landscap design new premis complet landscap substanti increas amount green space area close cooper citi author enabl integr design eastern boundari site mean citi green belt frankfurt grüngürtel extend ruhrort werft river toward ostpark site new ecb premis secur line secur requir modern central bank secur concept forese physic compon integr modul landscap design impair view build way großmarkthall remain visibl neighbour visit ostend area let turn next step taken construct new premis know current carri preliminari construct work receiv requir permit februari context follow work current undertaken excav work begun basement offic tower underground staff car park south site remain ramp old railway deliveri area two fourstorey annex build end großmarkthall remov may notic brick made extern facad annex build remov hand one one sinc reus renov facad hall goe well ecb announc general contractor carri main construct work new premis autumn year compani current select within framework europewid tender procedur januari follow construct basement slab foundat stone schedul laid frau roth hope space us diari time renov großmarkthall get way goe plan expect build work last around three year build complex finalis end would like finish introductori remark express gratitud various author involv project particular would like thank frau roth staff frankfurt citi plan depart commit effici collabor project especi applic process build permit agre mention moment ago guidelin receiv precis time communic relev author well organis speed applic handl testimoni excel collabor new ecb premis project team citi author thank attent dispos question reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en