Mario Draghi: Responsible leadership in times of crisis,13-06-2013,European Central Bank,ECB,727,"<p>Good afternoon.It is a great honour to receive this award for Responsible Leadership and I would like to thank Mario Monti for his kind introductory words. I regret that I am not able to join you in person today in Berlin but am pleased I can address you via Video. The fact we have a single currency and a European Central Bank is itself testament to the role of leadership. Many of you are too young to remember, but those of us who can recall Europe 20 years ago know how unimaginable it once was to speak about a single currency. Today, it is an integral part of our lives. But as this award reminds us, the key aspect of leadership is responsibility. In the words of Peter Drucker, “rank does not confer privilege or give power. It imposes responsibility”. As you know, the primary responsibility of the ECB is to maintain price stability in the euro area – to secure the value of our common currency. We take this responsibility with the utmost seriousness as it directly affects the lives of 330 million citizens of the euro area. Since the launch of the euro in 1999, we have fulfilled our mandate even through difficult times. We will continue to fulfil this task. I am very proud to be personally contributing to the historic project that the euro represents as the most tangible sign of European integration. But this pride is accompanied by a deep feeling of responsibility. There is no doubt that the recent period of economic and financial turbulence has tested us in new ways. We have had to take new measures to fulfil our responsibility for price stability. We had to look at all the data, assess all the evidence, and decide what measures were necessary to ensure the stability of the euro. One such decision was to combat market fragmentation by Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT), based on a country committing itself to strict and effective conditionality under an EU/IMF economic adjustment programme.At almost one year from its announcement, the benefits of OMT are visible to everybody: Banks have been able to re-access the market, for both funding and for raising capital, and the strong divergence in funding costs across constituencies has receded. Deposits have flown back: banks in stressed countries have seen the deposits by the euro area money-holding sector increasing by about 200 billion euros since August 2012. Another sign of normalisation, and a very important one for German savers, has been the increase in German government bond yields, previously suppressed by panic-driven safe-haven flows, which have edged up by around 25 basis points.And Target balances, which are a summary indicator of fragmentation, have declined by 285 billion euros, or 25%, since the peak last year, and now are at the same level as in late-2011. Therefore, also perceived risks for creditor countries such as Germany have greatly diminished.The establishment of OMT has therefore been beneficial to everybody: sovereigns, corporations, banks as well as individuals, and it has benefited both periphery and core countries. The decision on OMT was necessary. It was effective. And it was in line with our mandate.It was necessary to remove severe obstacles to the appropriate transmission of monetary policy that were putting the singleness of our monetary policy at risk and which were harming the economy of the euro area very deeply.And it is fully in line with our mandate because it is designed to preserve price stability for the euro area and uses instruments foreseen in the Statute. In short, for the ECB responsible leadership has meant being true to our founding Treaty. Staying independent from the voices calling for us to “do more” or to “do less”; staying fully focused on our mandate to secure price stability for the citizens of the euro area. For the euro area to now move forward and establish itself on stronger ground, we need all decision-makers to take their responsibilities. Governments to put right their public finances and address the structural challenges to growth in their economies; and the euro area as a whole to build a stronger economic and monetary union based on shared sovereignty and greater legitimacy.There is a great deal of work ahead of us. But I am sure we will succeed.Thank you for your attention.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",good afternoon great honour receiv award respons leadership would like thank mario monti kind introductori word regret abl join person today berlin pleas address via video fact singl currenc european central bank testament role leadership mani young rememb us recal europ year ago know unimagin speak singl currenc today integr part live award remind us key aspect leadership respons word peter drucker rank confer privileg give power impos respons know primari respons ecb maintain price stabil euro area secur valu common currenc take respons utmost serious direct affect live million citizen euro area sinc launch euro fulfil mandat even difficult time continu fulfil task proud person contribut histor project euro repres tangibl sign european integr pride accompani deep feel respons doubt recent period econom financi turbul test us new way take new measur fulfil respons price stabil look data assess evid decid measur necessari ensur stabil euro one decis combat market fragment outright monetari transact omt base countri commit strict effect condit euimf econom adjust programm almost one year announc benefit omt visibl everybodi bank abl reaccess market fund rais capit strong diverg fund cost across constitu reced deposit flown back bank stress countri seen deposit euro area moneyhold sector increas billion euro sinc august anoth sign normalis import one german saver increas german govern bond yield previous suppress panicdriven safehaven flow edg around basi point target balanc summari indic fragment declin billion euro sinc peak last year level late therefor also perceiv risk creditor countri germani great diminish establish omt therefor benefici everybodi sovereign corpor bank well individu benefit peripheri core countri decis omt necessari effect line mandat necessari remov sever obstacl appropri transmiss monetari polici put singl monetari polici risk harm economi euro area deepli fulli line mandat design preserv price stabil euro area use instrument foreseen statut short ecb respons leadership meant true found treati stay independ voic call us less stay fulli focus mandat secur price stabil citizen euro area euro area move forward establish stronger ground need decisionmak take respons govern put right public financ address structur challeng growth economi euro area whole build stronger econom monetari union base share sovereignti greater legitimaci great deal work ahead us sure succeed thank attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en