Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The European response to the financial crisis,16-10-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,3379,"<p>[SLIDE 1]Thank you for for your invitation to speak here today. Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff’s new book, This Time is Different, reminds us that financial crises of the kind we are currently in have been happening over and over again for at least eight centuries. As an institution whose origins go back as long as 225 years, this bank hosting this morning’s breakfast meeting will already have experienced – and survived – its fair share of them.As you are well aware, the collapse of Lehman Brothers last September led to the most severe and synchronised economic downturn the world has experienced since the 1930s. Policy-makers across the globe responded quickly and decisively, taking extraordinary and unprecedented steps to prevent the economic and financial crisis getting even worse. We face similar challenges on both sides of the Atlantic. But there have been some differences in the policy responses in the US and the euro area. The choice and design of measures are influenced by the institutional features of the central banks, such as their degree of independence. They are also influenced by structural economic and financial characteristics, such as the relative importance of financial markets and commercial banks in the funding of businesses and households.[SLIDE 2]You will be familiar with the approach taken by US policymakers. So today, I would like to offer you a European perspective. In particular, I will focus on the measures taken in response to the crisis – by the European Central Bank, by European governments, and by supervisors and regulators across Europe. I will also give my first assessment of these measures, acknowledging that this can only be preliminary as the crisis is not yet fully behind us.Let me start with the policy area in which I of course have been involved the closest: the monetary policy of the European Central Bank. [SLIDE 3]Between October 2008 and May 2009, the ECB lowered its main policy interest rate, the rate on the main refinancing operations, by 325 basis points. The current rate of 1% is the lowest since the launch of the euro in 1999, which is a reflection of rapidly receding inflationary pressures since the summer of 2008. This is in line with our primary objective at the ECB, to maintain price stability in the euro area in the medium term. In addition to lowering the policy interest rate, we have taken a number of measures to support the smooth functioning of the euro area interbank market. These measures have supported the flow of credit to households and enterprises in a way that goes above and beyond what could be achieved through rate reductions alone. [SLIDE 4]Our non-standard measures have come to be known as “enhanced credit support”. They focus primarily on commercial banks, as these are the main source of funding for households and businesses in the euro area. Just as to give you a comparison to the US: in the euro area about 70% of the funding of corporations and households comes from banks; the equivalent share for the US is around 25%. So a well-functioning money market is essential for Europe’s commercial banks and also for the ECB as the transmission of monetary policy to the economy starts here. [SLIDE 5]Since all of our non-standard measures are still in place at present, let me briefly summarise their five building blocks: First, the full accommodation of banks’ liquidity requests at fixed interest rates; Second, the expansion of the list of assets eligible as collateral; Third, the lengthening of the maturities of our refinancing operations, up to 1 year; Fourth, the provision of liquidity in foreign currencies, notably the US dollar; and, finally, outright purchases of euro-denominated covered bonds issued in the euro area. The covered bond market is traditionally an important source of funding for banks in the euro area. This market segment suffered heavily from the financial crisis. With EUR 60 billion, we have chosen a volume significant enough to support market functioning but not so large as to dominate market developments. Still, compared with bond purchase programmes in some other major countries, the amount spent by the ECB in the context of its covered bond programme is fairly modest. However, this reflects the fact that the primary role of the ECB is to act as a catalyst for this market, not as a market maker. The outright purchase of covered bonds is the only truly new element in our monetary policy framework. All other non-standard measures have been implemented by using the flexibility of our monetary policy framework. The implementation of our enhanced credit support has been achieved by adjustments in some parameters of the framework. For example, before the crisis started the ECB already accepted private securities and asset-backed securities as collateral in our refinancing operations, with appropriate risk-control measures in place. Expansion of the list of eligible collateral was simply achieved by lowering the rating threshold from “A-“ to “BBB-“, with the exception of asset-backed securities.[SLIDE 6]Overall, looking at the effectiveness of our measures of enhanced credit support, we are pleased to see a positive impact on money market conditions and beyond. The large injection of liquidity into the money market led to a decrease in money market interest rates at the very short end, to levels close to the ECB’s deposit rate of 0.25%. While the measures we have taken have prevented things from getting worse and helped to revive the money market, we know that credit to the economy is not yet back to normal. The annual growth rate of loans from banks to non-financial corporations stood at a mere 0.7% in August. For a large part, this low number reflects low demand as continuing uncertainty in the business outlook are likely to dampen firms’ demand for bank financing. Supply factors also played some role. But the latest version of our Bank Lending Survey indicates that the pace of tightening in credit standards, reflecting supply-factors such as banks’ access to market financing, was slowing down in the second quarter of 2009. While credit growth is subdued, the continuing de-leveraging of banks’ balance sheets does not stopped banks from giving credit to households and businesses in the euro area as deleveraging has been mainly driven by shedding external assets rather than domestic assets. So for how long do we need to maintain our current monetary policy stance? Certainly, the strong intervention of the ECB in the euro area money market cannot be maintained forever. We will phase out these measures once the underlying rationale fades away and the situation returns to normal. The crisis is not yet over, and the time to exit has not come. But when it comes, we are ready to take the appropriate action. We will act to ensure that the measures taken are phased out in a timely fashion, and that the liquidity provided is absorbed so as to counter effectively any threat to price stability over the medium to longer term. Of course, this phasing out is not a linear, straightforward process. Many aspects need to be considered, and the ECB has the operational flexibility and institutional independence to implement the desirable course of action in a determined manner whenever the need arises. Overall, we are well-placed to do so as the feasibility of a timely exit was one of our guiding principles when designing the non-standard measures. Apart from the outright purchases of covered bonds, all measures taken have finite lifetimes and allow for the return of monetary policy to the pre-crisis mode when required. Let me now turn to the response of European governments to the financial crisis. This consisted of measures to support the financial system and measures to reduce the effects of the financial crisis on the rest of the economy. After the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, most European governments swiftly adopted measures to support the financial system in a coordinated action. These included increasing deposit insurance ceilings, guarantees for bank liabilities and bank recapitalisations. The extent and design of the commitments vary widely between countries, reflecting the specific characteristics of national financial systems and the presence of large and systemically important institutions. [SLIDE 7]Our assessment of the effectiveness of the support measures is overall positive. The measures were needed for averting a further escalation of the crisis in late 2008. Initial empirical evidence suggests that government support measures have been effective in reducing banks’ default risk. Here it seems that capital injections have been effective as well as debt guarantees and asset purchases. The three-month euro and dollar Libor spreads over market overnight interest rates, a measure of credit risk, have recently fallen to their lowest levels since the collapse of Lehman Brothers.[SLIDE 8]Besides these measures to support the financial sector, the government response to the crisis also includes the fiscal reaction to reduce the fall-out of the financial crisis on the rest of the economy. This is a combination of the operation of so-called automatic stabilisers (the automatic reduction in tax receipts and the rise in government welfare payments as economic activity declines) and specific discretionary fiscal measures, such as additional public investment, tax relief and subsidies for part-time employment. The size and timing of the stimulus measures, of course, differed considerably between countries. For the whole euro area, however, the European Commission estimates the stimulus measures to amount to 1 percent of GDP over the years 2009- 2010. The variety of stimulus measures and their dependence on the expectations and reactions of households and businesses make it difficult to assess precisely how effective they are. But measures such as car scrapping schemes have helped to sustain private consumption and, on the whole, the recent bout of fiscal activism in the euro area seems to be reasonably well co-ordinated, well timed and well targeted. In the euro area, GDP contracted by 0.1 percent in the second quarter of 2009. While still negative, this was better than most had forecasted. [SLIDE 9]All in all, the government response has been effective and we have welcomed it. But it comes at a cost as well. According to the European Commission’s spring forecast, the euro area deficit is set to increase to 6.5 percent of GDP in 2010 with the debt increasing to 84 percent of GDP, from 69% in 2008. [SLIDE 10]The fiscal loosening should be only temporary and we need to make sure that it is abandoned as soon as the underlying rationale fades away and the economic environment improves. The governments should ensure that fiscal consolidation does not start later than the economic recovery when private demand can substitute the public demand. Only a part of the fiscal consolidation will occur through the automatic stabilisers and the temporary nature of some fiscal stimulus measures. Additional and more ambitious fiscal adjustment will be needed as well. Fiscal policy can only be a successful macroeconomic tool if it is sustainable in the long term. The crisis has reminded us that monetary and fiscal policies are not sufficient to stabilize the economic situation. We also need to ensure the stability of our financial system. For this we need proper regulation and macroprudential supervision of systemic risk. Let me first focus on the first issue.In discussing monetary and fiscal policy, I have focused on the European response to the crisis. Now as I turn to the regulatory reform, I necessarily will speak about the global response. Many of the issues can only be truly tackled at the global level. Indeed, under the aegis of the Group of Twenty, authorities worldwide have agreed on a common agenda for regulatory reform. Let me briefly recall the progress made thus far and highlight the measures that are of great importance to us. I will focus on three topics on the regulatory reform agenda that in my opinion are key: the need to strengthen the prudential framework for banks; the need to extend the scope of regulation to all systemically important institutions, markets and instruments; and the need to strengthen the oversight of systemically important institutions. [SLIDE 11]First, the prudential framework: banks will be required to hold more and higher quality capital that is capable of absorbing losses on a going concern basis. Counter-cyclical capital buffers will be built up in good times to be drawn down in times of stress. A leverage ratio will be introduced as a supplementary measure to the Basel II framework to curb excessive balance sheet growth, and a liquidity requirement will be established, obliging banks to hold sufficient high-quality liquid assets. These measures, to be issued by year-end, will significantly increase the ability of financial institutions to withstand shocks and therefore the resilience of the financial system. Let me highlight, however, that these measures will be phased-in as the economy recovers, to ensure they do not hamper the credit flow to the economy. Second, the scope of regulation: Credit rating agencies will be subject to mandatory registration and oversight, with the aim of making them more transparent and reducing the potential for conflicts of interest related to the rating process. Hedge fund managers will also be subject to registration and disclosure requirements. This sector, which is highly connected with other parts of the financial system, needs to be included in the effort to achieve greater transparency. In the European Union, legislation on Credit Rating Agencies was approved while work on alternative investment fund managers, including managers of hedge funds, is on its way. Legislative proposals have also been tabled in the US for both sectors.Moreover, there is a consensus on the need to extend regulation to the over-the-counter derivative markets, which should be subject to greater transparency and reduced counterparty risk. In this context, support on both sides of the Atlantic has been given to the establishment of central counterparties. Authorities at the international level have worked closely together, with the result that central facilities have now been introduced in both the US and Europe to clear a considerable share of credit default swap transactions.Third, systemically important financial institutions: We need to mitigate the moral hazard of the “too big to fail” financial institutions, while minimising fiscal costs in case of future instances of financial distress and restoring market discipline and correct incentives. Action in this area is crucial. Work needs to be carried out on assessing appropriate tools, such as the introduction of a capital or liquidity surcharge, or the development of specific contingency plans for major cross-border firms – also referred to as “living wills” – that will facilitate an orderly resolution or wind-down of a financial institution in a rapid and cost-effective manner, should that prove necessary. The second key pillar in ensuring financial stability is related to the concerns of systemic risk and the supervisory architecture, in particular the macro-prudential approach to supervision. Measures are also being taken at the international level, but I would now like to return my focus to the European response. The European Commission has recently issued its proposal on the establishment of a European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). The new body will be responsible for macro-prudential oversight in the European Union. It will identify and assess risks to financial stability, and issue risk warnings and policy recommendations. In this respect, the ECB will be assigned to provide the analytical, statistical, administrative and logistical support to the ESRB.For the success of such macroprudential supervision, three issues are crucial. First, the ESRB needs to have good cooperation and extensive information exchange with the microprudential European Supervisory Authorities to ensure a proper monitoring and analysis of systemic risk. Second, effective mechanisms for the monitoring of the recommendations that the ESRB will issue are needed. And third, the global dimension of macroprudential supervision is key. We need to ensure international coordination and good cooperation with the International Monetary Fund, the Financial Stability Board and other country counterparts that can contribute towards a better assessment and earlier detection of risks that originate from outside the European Union.Finally, let me say that while institutional setups are needed to safeguard financial stability, trust in the stability of the financial system cannot be achieved solely by regulation alone. Individual financial institutions also need to contribute their share. This concerns, banks’ business models, corporate governance and general values guiding the behaviour of market participants. In this context, let me briefly touch on the issue of business models. Within the euro area, some banks have been able to withstand the financial crisis fairly well while others have been affected a great deal. In general, it appears that “old-fashioned” banks, following the traditional banking model characterised by an originate-and-hold strategy and funding via deposits seem to have weathered the financial storm better than banks that relied on the “originate-to-distribute” model. Many other factors surely also played a role in explaining differences across countries and banks. For example, the amount of capital buffers held by banks and the differences in the sectoral and geographical exposure of banks. Without going further into details, it is obvious there are important questions to be answered about the optimal business models for banking, by supervisors, but also by the banks themselves. [2]Let me also say a few words on the importance of self set standards and values that should govern the behaviour of market participants. I cite Avinash Persuad, Professor at Gresham College: “The response to this several hundred years ago was the livery companies, clubs and guilds which amongst other things used ethical standards to restrict market entry.” I agree with him when he concludes that “there is a role for modern day interpretation of livery clubs, using due process to establish higher standards than we can expect the law to provide”. [3] Here, we particularly need more self set standards in the financial industry on medium term perspectives in compensation schemes, sound principles for risk management, and greater accountability for individual decisions. So, public regulation and supervision is needed and necessary. But to implement the lessons learnt from the recent crisis we need the market as well to set its own high standards of corporate governance and future practises in financial markets. Let me conclude. Policymakers around the world agree on the need to provide public support under current circumstances. But we also acknowledge that institutional and macroeconomic differences between countries have caused some diversity in the design of support plans. In terms of monetary policy, in the euro area the priority has been to repair the functioning of the money market. This reflects the crucial role that commercial banks in the euro area play in funding businesses and households, and the importance of the money market for these banks. The different measures taken in the euro area and the US may have implications for the timing and speed of the withdrawal of the non-standard measures once that time comes. Here too we might see some differences across the Atlantic, in part because of differences in the US and European business cycles.Monetary and fiscal policies in the euro area have thus far been very successful in preventing worse developments, and have helped to kick-start economic stabilisation and recovery. At the same time we need to be more wary of financial stability matters. Here regulatory reform is on the way and greater focus on macroprudential supervision is being implemented. Regulation should set the right incentives for market participants, balancing profit-seeking and risk-taking. International cooperation in this area is vital to set a level playing field for all financial institutions and avoid regulatory arbitrage. While the efforts made so far have been encouraging, innovative regulation and supervision can only be complementary to standards and rules self set by the financial market. Financial market participants have to aware of their own responsibility and have to draw the right lessons from the crisis for their future practises. Taken together with the public measures, this is to the overall benefit of healthy, stable and trustworthy financial markets. Thank you for your attention.[1] I thank Guido Wolswijk, Katri Mikkonen, Michael Wedow, Fatima Pires, Nico Valckx and Marien Ferdinanduse for their input to the preparation of this speech.[2] More information on this can for instance be found in my presentation “Business models in banking: Is there a best practice?”, at the CAREFIN Conference at Bocconi University, Milan, 21 September 2009.[3] Avinash Persaud, Finance & Ethics: Two couple steps to easier collaboration, Gresham College, London, 20 January 2005Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",slide thank invit speak today carmen reinhart kenneth rogoff new book time differ remind us financi crise kind current happen least eight centuri institut whose origin go back long year bank host morn breakfast meet alreadi experienc surviv fair share well awar collaps lehman brother last septemb led sever synchronis econom downturn world experienc sinc policymak across globe respond quick decis take extraordinari unpreced step prevent econom financi crisi get even wors face similar challeng side atlant differ polici respons us euro area choic design measur influenc institut featur central bank degre independ also influenc structur econom financi characterist relat import financi market commerci bank fund busi household slide familiar approach taken us policymak today would like offer european perspect particular focus measur taken respons crisi european central bank european govern supervisor regul across europ also give first assess measur acknowledg preliminari crisi yet fulli behind us let start polici area cours involv closest monetari polici european central bank slide octob may ecb lower main polici interest rate rate main refinanc oper basi point current rate lowest sinc launch euro reflect rapid reced inflationari pressur sinc summer line primari object ecb maintain price stabil euro area medium term addit lower polici interest rate taken number measur support smooth function euro area interbank market measur support flow credit household enterpris way goe beyond could achiev rate reduct alon slide nonstandard measur come known enhanc credit support focus primarili commerci bank main sourc fund household busi euro area give comparison us euro area fund corpor household come bank equival share us around wellfunct money market essenti europ commerci bank also ecb transmiss monetari polici economi start slide sinc nonstandard measur still place present let briefli summaris five build block first full accommod bank liquid request fix interest rate second expans list asset elig collater third lengthen matur refinanc oper year fourth provis liquid foreign currenc notabl us dollar final outright purchas eurodenomin cover bond issu euro area cover bond market tradit import sourc fund bank euro area market segment suffer heavili financi crisi eur billion chosen volum signific enough support market function larg domin market develop still compar bond purchas programm major countri amount spent ecb context cover bond programm fair modest howev reflect fact primari role ecb act catalyst market market maker outright purchas cover bond truli new element monetari polici framework nonstandard measur implement use flexibl monetari polici framework implement enhanc credit support achiev adjust paramet framework exampl crisi start ecb alreadi accept privat secur assetback secur collater refinanc oper appropri riskcontrol measur place expans list elig collater simpli achiev lower rate threshold bbb except assetback secur slide overal look effect measur enhanc credit support pleas see posit impact money market condit beyond larg inject liquid money market led decreas money market interest rate short end level close ecb deposit rate measur taken prevent thing get wors help reviv money market know credit economi yet back normal annual growth rate loan bank nonfinanci corpor stood mere august larg part low number reflect low demand continu uncertainti busi outlook like dampen firm demand bank financ suppli factor also play role latest version bank lend survey indic pace tighten credit standard reflect supplyfactor bank access market financ slow second quarter credit growth subdu continu deleverag bank balanc sheet stop bank give credit household busi euro area deleverag main driven shed extern asset rather domest asset long need maintain current monetari polici stanc certain strong intervent ecb euro area money market cannot maintain forev phase measur under rational fade away situat return normal crisi yet time exit come come readi take appropri action act ensur measur taken phase time fashion liquid provid absorb counter effect threat price stabil medium longer term cours phase linear straightforward process mani aspect need consid ecb oper flexibl institut independ implement desir cours action determin manner whenev need aris overal wellplac feasibl time exit one guid principl design nonstandard measur apart outright purchas cover bond measur taken finit lifetim allow return monetari polici precrisi mode requir let turn respons european govern financi crisi consist measur support financi system measur reduc effect financi crisi rest economi collaps lehman brother septemb european govern swift adopt measur support financi system coordin action includ increas deposit insur ceil guarante bank liabil bank recapitalis extent design commit vari wide countri reflect specif characterist nation financi system presenc larg system import institut slide assess effect support measur overal posit measur need avert escal crisi late initi empir evid suggest govern support measur effect reduc bank default risk seem capit inject effect well debt guarante asset purchas threemonth euro dollar libor spread market overnight interest rate measur credit risk recent fallen lowest level sinc collaps lehman brother slide besid measur support financi sector govern respons crisi also includ fiscal reaction reduc fallout financi crisi rest economi combin oper socal automat stabilis automat reduct tax receipt rise govern welfar payment econom activ declin specif discretionari fiscal measur addit public invest tax relief subsidi parttim employ size time stimulus measur cours differ consider countri whole euro area howev european commiss estim stimulus measur amount percent gdp year varieti stimulus measur depend expect reaction household busi make difficult assess precis effect measur car scrap scheme help sustain privat consumpt whole recent bout fiscal activ euro area seem reason well coordin well time well target euro area gdp contract percent second quarter still negat better forecast slide govern respons effect welcom come cost well accord european commiss spring forecast euro area deficit set increas percent gdp debt increas percent gdp slide fiscal loosen temporari need make sure abandon soon under rational fade away econom environ improv govern ensur fiscal consolid start later econom recoveri privat demand substitut public demand part fiscal consolid occur automat stabilis temporari natur fiscal stimulus measur addit ambiti fiscal adjust need well fiscal polici success macroeconom tool sustain long term crisi remind us monetari fiscal polici suffici stabil econom situat also need ensur stabil financi system need proper regul macroprudenti supervis system risk let first focus first issu discuss monetari fiscal polici focus european respons crisi turn regulatori reform necessarili speak global respons mani issu truli tackl global level inde aegi group twenti author worldwid agre common agenda regulatori reform let briefli recal progress made thus far highlight measur great import us focus three topic regulatori reform agenda opinion key need strengthen prudenti framework bank need extend scope regul system import institut market instrument need strengthen oversight system import institut slide first prudenti framework bank requir hold higher qualiti capit capabl absorb loss go concern basi countercycl capit buffer built good time drawn time stress leverag ratio introduc supplementari measur basel ii framework curb excess balanc sheet growth liquid requir establish oblig bank hold suffici highqual liquid asset measur issu yearend signific increas abil financi institut withstand shock therefor resili financi system let highlight howev measur phasedin economi recov ensur hamper credit flow economi second scope regul credit rate agenc subject mandatori registr oversight aim make transpar reduc potenti conflict interest relat rate process hedg fund manag also subject registr disclosur requir sector high connect part financi system need includ effort achiev greater transpar european union legisl credit rate agenc approv work altern invest fund manag includ manag hedg fund way legisl propos also tabl us sector moreov consensus need extend regul overthecount deriv market subject greater transpar reduc counterparti risk context support side atlant given establish central counterparti author intern level work close togeth result central facil introduc us europ clear consider share credit default swap transact third system import financi institut need mitig moral hazard big fail financi institut minimis fiscal cost case futur instanc financi distress restor market disciplin correct incent action area crucial work need carri assess appropri tool introduct capit liquid surcharg develop specif conting plan major crossbord firm also refer live will facilit order resolut winddown financi institut rapid costeffect manner prove necessari second key pillar ensur financi stabil relat concern system risk supervisori architectur particular macroprudenti approach supervis measur also taken intern level would like return focus european respons european commiss recent issu propos establish european system risk board esrb new bodi respons macroprudenti oversight european union identifi assess risk financi stabil issu risk warn polici recommend respect ecb assign provid analyt statist administr logist support esrb success macroprudenti supervis three issu crucial first esrb need good cooper extens inform exchang microprudenti european supervisori author ensur proper monitor analysi system risk second effect mechan monitor recommend esrb issu need third global dimens macroprudenti supervis key need ensur intern coordin good cooper intern monetari fund financi stabil board countri counterpart contribut toward better assess earlier detect risk origin outsid european union final let say institut setup need safeguard financi stabil trust stabil financi system cannot achiev sole regul alon individu financi institut also need contribut share concern bank busi model corpor govern general valu guid behaviour market particip context let briefli touch issu busi model within euro area bank abl withstand financi crisi fair well other affect great deal general appear oldfashion bank follow tradit bank model characteris originateandhold strategi fund via deposit seem weather financi storm better bank reli originatetodistribut model mani factor sure also play role explain differ across countri bank exampl amount capit buffer held bank differ sector geograph exposur bank without go detail obvious import question answer optim busi model bank supervisor also bank let also say word import self set standard valu govern behaviour market particip cite avinash persuad professor gresham colleg respons sever hundr year ago liveri compani club guild amongst thing use ethic standard restrict market entri agre conclud role modern day interpret liveri club use due process establish higher standard expect law provid particular need self set standard financi industri medium term perspect compens scheme sound principl risk manag greater account individu decis public regul supervis need necessari implement lesson learnt recent crisi need market well set high standard corpor govern futur practis financi market let conclud policymak around world agre need provid public support current circumst also acknowledg institut macroeconom differ countri caus divers design support plan term monetari polici euro area prioriti repair function money market reflect crucial role commerci bank euro area play fund busi household import money market bank differ measur taken euro area us may implic time speed withdraw nonstandard measur time come might see differ across atlant part differ us european busi cycl monetari fiscal polici euro area thus far success prevent wors develop help kickstart econom stabilis recoveri time need wari financi stabil matter regulatori reform way greater focus macroprudenti supervis implement regul set right incent market particip balanc profitseek risktak intern cooper area vital set level play field financi institut avoid regulatori arbitrag effort made far encourag innov regul supervis complementari standard rule self set financi market financi market particip awar respons draw right lesson crisi futur practis taken togeth public measur overal benefit healthi stabl trustworthi financi market thank attent thank guido wolswijk katri mikkonen wedow fatima pire nico valckx marien ferdinandus input prepar speech inform instanc found present busi model bank best practic carefin confer bocconi univers milan septemb avinash persaud financ ethic two coupl step easier collabor gresham colleg london januari reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en