Mario Draghi: Europe’s pursuit of ‘a more perfect Union’,09-10-2013,European Central Bank,ECB,3621,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,I am delighted to have been invited to give this year’s Malcolm Wiener lecture on international political economy. It is always a pleasure to be back in this country, particularly here in Cambridge where I studied for my PhD back in the 1970s.The United States has often been described as a young nation, but the institution that I have the honour of leading is considerably younger. The European Central Bank (ECB) and the single currency began operations nearly 15 years ago at the beginning of 1999. Today I would like to give you a flavour of both the circumstances of our beginnings and the challenging environment of our teenage years.As you will all be aware, Europe is currently engaged in a far-reaching process of reform.Many of those reforms are taking place within the Member States of the European Union (EU) – to make their public finances more sustainable; to make their economies more competitive; and to strengthen the balance sheets of their domestic banks.But there is also an important stream of reforms taking place at the European level – the counterpart of what you call the federal level here in the US. New rules and institutions are being created that will change the relationship between the Union and the Member States.It is this process and its implications on which I want to focus in my remarks today.The preamble of the European Treaty makes ‘ever closer union’ a goal of the EU. For some people, this creates anxiety. It seems to promise an inexorable movement towards a future super-state. Many Europeans, with different national histories and cultures, feel that they are not ready for that.So it is important to understand that the agenda facing Europe today is not adequately captured by the phrase ‘ever closer union’. In my view, it is better encapsulated by wording borrowed from the Constitution of the United States: the establishment of a ‘more perfect union’. By this, I mean that we are ‘perfecting’ something that has already begun – namely, the economic and monetary union that was launched in 1999. Policy-makers are following through the consequences of the decision to create a genuine single market supported by a single currency. In what follows, I would like to describe several of those consequences. In doing so, I will explore two broad themes.First, I will argue that a single market necessarily has political implications, in which a partial sharing of individual and national sovereignty can be the best means to preserve that sovereignty.Second, I will explain how the concepts of a banking union and a strengthened fiscal setup are supportive of the single market and the single currency. To understand the EU and the euro area, it is important to appreciate the difference between a free trade area and a true single market.A free trade area is a partial and reversible arrangement. A single market, by contrast, is a universal and permanent union. This is a distinction with fundamental implications.Because a single market is universal and permanent, governments and parliaments forfeit, both in principle and by Treaty, the ability to reinstate border controls. This means that, unlike in a free trade area, they cannot act alone to protect their constituents from unfair or unlawful competition from abroad.Yet such underpinning at the political level is vital for a market to function. There cannot be a free market without such fundamental elements of law as the protection of property rights and the enforcement of contracts. [1]So while a free trade area can be managed through intergovernmental cooperation, a single market requires a supranational organisation. There has to be a judiciary with the power to enforce competition law at the level of the market. In Europe, this authority is devolved to the European Commission and the European Court of Justice.If there is a judiciary, there naturally has to be a legislature, to write the law enforced by the judiciary. In Europe, the EU Council and the European Parliament jointly perform this role.And if there is a legislature and a judiciary, then there also has to be an executive able to implement their decisions. Here again, in Europe, the European Commission is entrusted with executive responsibility.This is what I mean when I say the single market necessarily has political implications. Indeed, it is well known that the short commerce clause of the Constitution of the United States, which grants Congress “power to regulate commerce (…) among the several states”, forms the basis of a considerable body of federal legislation governing economic matters.The more difficult question in Europe is the degree to which powers must be transferred to the supranational level to support the single market – or put differently, how much sovereignty needs to be shared. In my view, one way to approach this question is by considering more carefully what we mean by sovereignty. One way to look at sovereignty is normative, and was historically favoured by absolutists such as Jean Bodin in the sixteenth century. Sovereignty here is defined in relation to rights: the right to declare war and treat the conditions of the peace, to raise taxes, to mint money and to judge in last resort.Another way to look at it is positive. Sovereignty relates to the ability to deliver in practice the essential services that people expect from government. A sovereign that is not capable of effectively discharging its mandate would be sovereign only in name.This second approach is more consistent with the writings of the political philosophers who most influenced our modern democracies. John Locke, in his second treatise of government, affirms that the sovereign exists only as a fiduciary power to act for certain ends. It is the ability to achieve those ends that defines, and legitimises, sovereignty.The same argument is made by James Madison in federalist paper 45, in which he states that “no form of government whatever has any other value than as it may be fitted for the attainment of [the public good]”. I see this positive view as essentially the right way to think about sovereignty. And I think it needs to be the guiding principle when deciding which powers should be at national or European levels. We need to look at effectiveness, not at abstract principles that may be empty in today’s world.Such an approach moves us away from a zero-sum view of sovereignty as power, where one body loses sovereignty and another gains it. Instead, by placing the needs of citizens at the centre, it allows us to view sovereignty in terms of outcomes – and this can be positive-sum. This way of thinking is in fact already embedded in the EU Treaty under the principle of subsidiarity. This states that powers cannot be transferred to the level of the Union unless action is more effective at that level than at a lower level of government. In other words, it places the emphasis squarely on the efficacy of policy. In my view, it is this pragmatic focus on policy efficacy that should be the motor of further integration.Policy efficacy was indeed one of the main motivations for monetary union – in particular, to maximise the potential gains from Member States forming a single market. A first argument in favour of the single currency related to the desirability of a single means of payment and unit of account in a single market. A single currency is not necessary for trade, but it is helpful, to the extent that it eliminates currency conversion costs and increases price transparency.A second argument related to the conditions for fair competition in a single market. In a system of floating exchange rates, individual governments may be tempted to manipulate their currency to pursue ‘beggar thy neighbour’ policies, which constitutes a distortion of competition. An economy that increases productivity and competitiveness can be deprived of the benefits it should enjoy in terms of increased market share because of currency depreciation in competing countries.Indeed, the instability of exchange rates post-Bretton Woods has arguably vindicated the views of economists such as Ragnar Nurkse, who, in an influential study commissioned by the League of Nations and published in 1944, warned of the economic losses resulting from currency volatility. [2] It is also worth remembering that Nobel laureate Robert Mundell developed his theory on optimum currency areas as a critique of flexible exchange rates in a single market, not in support of such an arrangement. He said that he ‘could not see why countries that were in the process of forming a common market should saddle themselves with a new barrier to trade in the form of uncertainty about exchange rates’ [3].In any case, the desire to limit exchange rate volatility in the EU was formulated very soon after the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1970s. It has been reflected in successive fixed exchange rate arrangements, such as the European Monetary System and its successor the Exchange Rate Mechanism. And it has been reflected in the Treaty requirement that each Member State treat its exchange rate policy as a matter of common interest.Free trade and capital movements could clearly not be sacrificed in a true single market. Also, Europeans saw fixed exchange rates as an important component of fair competition. It was thus the national sovereignty over monetary policies that would have to be let go. In this sense, the single currency became a way of maximising the benefits of the single market. And the empirical evidence suggests that sharing a currency has indeed boosted trade, although the effect may be smaller than was earlier suggested. [4]Let me also add that, for several Member States, joining the single currency implied not only greater policy efficacy, but paradoxically, greater national influence. Whether Austria before 1999 or Latvia today, many Member States pursued a fixed exchange rate policy or currency board vis-à-vis a bigger neighbour – Germany in the past, the euro area today. This meant that they were effectively importing a monetary policy over which they had no say. Now, as members of the euro area, they have a say. When Latvia adopts the euro on 1 January next year, my colleague, the governor of the central bank of Latvia, will partake fully in the formulation of the ECB’s monetary policy. The same cannot be said of the countries that peg their currencies to the US dollar, some of which are considerably larger.The implications of the decision to set up a genuine single market are not limited to the creation of the single currency. The single currency itself has consequences, of which the most pressing is a banking union. The establishment of a banking union has been agreed by the Heads of State and Government in Europe and is now being delivered in stages, starting with the single supervisory mechanism. This has been entrusted to the ECB and has recently been approved by the European Parliament. We trust that a single resolution mechanism will enter into force by the beginning of 2015.To understand why a banking union is a consequence of the monetary union, it is worth recalling that only a small fraction of money is “outside” money, meaning the liability of the central bank. The bulk of money used in the economy is “inside” money, meaning the liability of a commercial bank. For money to be truly single within a currency area, there has to be full substitutability between its different forms. This means that one euro in a bank in any euro area country has to be fully substitutable with a euro in another. The only way to achieve this is to remove the differences in the banking system that can create fragmentation along national lines – and the most important difference is the way banks are supervised and, when necessary, resolved by national authorities.We are thus moving these functions to the European level to ensure that the single currency is matched by a single banking system. And this is consistent with the positive definition of sovereignty I gave earlier: a genuine banking union can give citizens more trust in their money than can different national approaches. Moreover, there is an important positive feedback effect here. While there is a chain of logic from the single market to the single currency to a banking union, a banking union in turn supports the single market. When fragmentation of the banking system takes place, it does not only undermine the singleness of money, but it also undermines the conditions of competition. This is because it results in a dispersion of bank lending rates along national lines, as we have seen in recent years.Let me be clear here: there is no reason per se why a Spanish firm should be able to borrow at exactly the same price as a Dutch firm. If the operating environment of both firms is different, then this can reasonably affect their credit risk and therefore the rate at which they borrow.But in a single market, a Spanish firm should be able to borrow from a Spanish bank at the same price at which it would borrow from a Dutch bank. If that is not the case, if the risk premium paid by a bank client in one country is not idiosyncratic but systemic, then there no longer truly is a single market for capital. Location would matter. And this is what a banking union aims to reverse.In Europe, such a banking union is even more important than in the US because over two- thirds of firms’ external financing takes place in the form of bank loans. For small and medium-sized enterprises this share is even higher. In the US, by contrast, the role of banks in firms’ external finance is only about one-third or even less. Hence, a banking union is crucial also for the euro area real economy. But, it can reasonably be asked, if a banking union is so important, why did this only become apparent in the last few years?The main reason is that the potential for financial fragmentation in the euro area was not recognised. Policy-makers and observers did not fully appreciate the extent to which diverging fundamentals between different economies could feed through to the banking system. This applies notably to sovereign debt, and the two-way interaction between sovereign distress and bank distress.Certainly, a banking union can play a major role in breaking the vicious circle we see in Europe between banks and their sovereigns. But there is also a strong onus on governments to ensure that sovereign debt performs its expected function in the financial system – that is, as a risk-free, safe asset. Let me therefore briefly turn to fiscal policies.It is welcome that governments in the euro area have made significant progress in consolidating their budgets, and hence removing some sovereign risk from the financial system. The primary fiscal deficit for the euro area has fallen from 3.5% of GDP in 2009 to around 0.5% in 2012. In the United States, by comparison, it was around 6% of GDP in 2012.That said, we need to ensure time consistency. We all know the experience of the first decade of the euro. Fiscal rules enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty were not sufficiently binding; market discipline likewise did not work in an effective way. [5]For this reason, the ECB has long argued in favour of moving towards more effective rules in the fiscal domain. We are convinced that they are crucial for the stability of the common currency in the longer term. I am therefore encouraged that policy-makers in Europe have been taking significant steps to strengthen the common fiscal rules. These steps include new ways of dealing with countries that do not comply with recommendations from the European Commission. They include giving the Commission the right to inspect national budgets before they go before national parliaments – a power the US federal government does not have over the states. And they include inserting balanced budget rules into their national constitutions or equivalent. We look forward to a full and transparent implementation of this new regime. These changes do to some extent represent a transfer of powers to the European level. But as with a banking union, I do not view it as a loss of sovereignty. Rather, I see the strengthening of the fiscal pillar in a manner that lends credibility to fiscal policies as a way to restore the efficacy of policy: for the Union as a whole, as countries are less affected by spillovers from fiscal difficulties in an integrated financial market; and also for the Member States themselves. This budget stabilisation capacity through the automatic stabilisers is diminished if governments are unable to run a deficit at the low point of the cycle – or put differently, if the credit of the government deteriorates to the point where its debt is no longer regarded as a safe asset. Indeed, if the credit of the government is impaired, and behaves like private credit, then government’s relative cost of borrowing increases at precisely the time when it needs to borrow. One can see this as the real loss of sovereignty. It prevents national governments from using normal fiscal policy for macroeconomic stabilisation. In this sense, steps that restore faith in public credit, such as more credible fiscal rules, restore the ability of governments to exercise the functions that citizens expect from them. This is particularly important in a monetary union where the burden of macroeconomic stabilisation cannot be entirely shifted onto the shoulders of the central bank. Our monetary policy mandate is to deliver medium-term price stability in the euro area as a whole. Fiscal policy has to absorb idiosyncratic or asymmetric shocks at a national level. And unlike in the United States, as fiscal policies are decentralised, such stabilisation takes place entirely at the sub-federal (or national) level in the euro area. However, if the fiscal rules and institutions are credible, there is ample scope for national policies to perform this role.Overall, the changes taking place in the euro area are making our monetary union more robust. At the national level, consolidation and structural reforms are helping most countries reach a more sustainable external position. At the European level, we are approaching a balance of competencies which, taken in combination, should provide more effective stabilisation. That said, it would seem misplaced to exclude that over time the euro area may move to a new equilibrium. Integration is a dynamic process and we need a certain degree of humility about where it will lead. If we look at the US, we see that it strengthened its union in different stages, with each stage eventually begetting the next. The creation of the Federal Reserve System in 1913, for example, was followed twenty years later by the creation of the FDIC, a key pillar of America’s banking union. The federal budget also developed significantly at this time.In Europe today, we are in some ways undergoing an analogous process. It is not analogous in the sense that the destination is the same. We do not know this. What is analogous is the guiding principle. Like the US, our orientation is pragmatic and driven by a desire for policy efficacy and to provide the functions citizens expect of government. We are then drawing the policy conclusions that follow, at the time when they are relevant.In the dark days of the crisis, many commentators on this side of the Atlantic looked at the euro area and were convinced it would fail. They were wrong in their medium-term macro view. The euro area has created 600,000 more jobs than the US since 1999. And while the unemployment rate has increased more in the euro area than in the US during the crisis, the employment rate in the US has fallen further than in the euro area, which makes the figures difficult to compare.But they were wrong in a more fundamental way. They had underestimated the depth of Europeans’ commitment to the euro. They mistook the euro for a fixed exchange rate regime, when in fact it is an irreversible single currency. And it is irreversible because it is born out of the commitment of European nations to closer integration – a commitment which, as the Nobel committee recognised last year, has roots in our desire for peace, security and transcending national differences.[1]There is a large literature on market development and the protection of property rights and the rule of law. For example, in an environment where property rights are well defined and protected, entrepreneurial activity is focused on innovation rather than on predation. An early reference is W. J. Baumol (1990): “Entrepreneurship: Productive, unproductive, and destructive”, Journal of Political Economy, 98, 5, pp. 893-921[2]R. Nurkse (1944). “International Currency Experience”. Geneva: League of Nations.[3]R. Mundell, ‘Optimum Currency Areas’, Columbia University (extended version of a luncheon speech presented at the Tel Aviv University, December 5, 1997)[4]See, among others, P. Lane (2006): “The real effects of EMU”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 5536. The paper states that “EMU has indeed contributed to greater economic integration – however, economic linkages with the rest of the world have also been growing strongly, such that the relative importance of intra-EMU trade has not dramatically increased”.[5]To quote the Delors Report: “To some extent market forces can exert a disciplinary influence […] However, the constraints imposed by market forces might either be too slow and weak or too sudden and disruptive.” Bayoumi et al. (1995) however provide some evidence in favour of market discipline on US data; see T. Bayoumi, M. Goldstein and G. Woglom (1995): “Do credit markets discipline sovereign borrowers? Evidence from U.S. States”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 27, 4, pp. 1046-1059.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen delight invit give year malcolm wiener lectur intern polit economi alway pleasur back countri particular cambridg studi phd back unit state often describ young nation institut honour lead consider younger european central bank ecb singl currenc began oper near year ago begin today would like give flavour circumst begin challeng environ teenag year awar europ current engag farreach process reform mani reform take place within member state european union eu make public financ sustain make economi competit strengthen balanc sheet domest bank also import stream reform take place european level counterpart call feder level us new rule institut creat chang relationship union member state process implic want focus remark today preambl european treati make ever closer union goal eu peopl creat anxieti seem promis inexor movement toward futur superst mani european differ nation histori cultur feel readi import understand agenda face europ today adequ captur phrase ever closer union view better encapsul word borrow constitut unit state establish perfect union mean perfect someth alreadi begun name econom monetari union launch policymak follow consequ decis creat genuin singl market support singl currenc follow would like describ sever consequ explor two broad theme first argu singl market necessarili polit implic partial share individu nation sovereignti best mean preserv sovereignti second explain concept bank union strengthen fiscal setup support singl market singl currenc understand eu euro area import appreci differ free trade area true singl market free trade area partial revers arrang singl market contrast univers perman union distinct fundament implic singl market univers perman govern parliament forfeit principl treati abil reinstat border control mean unlik free trade area cannot act alon protect constitu unfair unlaw competit abroad yet underpin polit level vital market function cannot free market without fundament element law protect properti right enforc contract free trade area manag intergovernment cooper singl market requir supran organis judiciari power enforc competit law level market europ author devolv european commiss european court justic judiciari natur legislatur write law enforc judiciari europ eu council european parliament joint perform role legislatur judiciari also execut abl implement decis europ european commiss entrust execut respons mean say singl market necessarili polit implic inde well known short commerc claus constitut unit state grant congress power regul commerc among sever state form basi consider bodi feder legisl govern econom matter difficult question europ degre power must transfer supran level support singl market put differ much sovereignti need share view one way approach question consid care mean sovereignti one way look sovereignti normat histor favour absolutist jean bodin sixteenth centuri sovereignti defin relat right right declar war treat condit peac rais tax mint money judg last resort anoth way look posit sovereignti relat abil deliv practic essenti servic peopl expect govern sovereign capabl effect discharg mandat would sovereign name second approach consist write polit philosoph influenc modern democraci lock second treatis govern affirm sovereign exist fiduciari power act certain end abil achiev end defin legitimis sovereignti argument made jame madison federalist paper state form govern whatev valu may fit attain public good see posit view essenti right way think sovereignti think need guid principl decid power nation european level need look effect abstract principl may empti today world approach move us away zerosum view sovereignti power one bodi lose sovereignti anoth gain instead place need citizen centr allow us view sovereignti term outcom positivesum way think fact alreadi embed eu treati principl subsidiar state power cannot transfer level union unless action effect level lower level govern word place emphasi squar efficaci polici view pragmat focus polici efficaci motor integr polici efficaci inde one main motiv monetari union particular maximis potenti gain member state form singl market first argument favour singl currenc relat desir singl mean payment unit account singl market singl currenc necessari trade help extent elimin currenc convers cost increas price transpar second argument relat condit fair competit singl market system float exchang rate individu govern may tempt manipul currenc pursu beggar thi neighbour polici constitut distort competit economi increas product competit depriv benefit enjoy term increas market share currenc depreci compet countri inde instabl exchang rate postbretton wood arguabl vindic view economist ragnar nurks influenti studi commiss leagu nation publish warn econom loss result currenc volatil also worth rememb nobel laureat robert mundel develop theori optimum currenc area critiqu flexibl exchang rate singl market support arrang said could see countri process form common market saddl new barrier trade form uncertainti exchang rate case desir limit exchang rate volatil eu formul soon collaps bretton wood system earli reflect success fix exchang rate arrang european monetari system successor exchang rate mechan reflect treati requir member state treat exchang rate polici matter common interest free trade capit movement could clear sacrif true singl market also european saw fix exchang rate import compon fair competit thus nation sovereignti monetari polici would let go sens singl currenc becam way maximis benefit singl market empir evid suggest share currenc inde boost trade although effect may smaller earlier suggest let also add sever member state join singl currenc impli greater polici efficaci paradox greater nation influenc whether austria latvia today mani member state pursu fix exchang rate polici currenc board visàvi bigger neighbour germani past euro area today meant effect import monetari polici say member euro area say latvia adopt euro januari next year colleagu governor central bank latvia partak fulli formul ecb monetari polici cannot said countri peg currenc us dollar consider larger implic decis set genuin singl market limit creation singl currenc singl currenc consequ press bank union establish bank union agre head state govern europ deliv stage start singl supervisori mechan entrust ecb recent approv european parliament trust singl resolut mechan enter forc begin understand bank union consequ monetari union worth recal small fraction money outsid money mean liabil central bank bulk money use economi insid money mean liabil commerci bank money truli singl within currenc area full substitut differ form mean one euro bank euro area countri fulli substitut euro anoth way achiev remov differ bank system creat fragment along nation line import differ way bank supervis necessari resolv nation author thus move function european level ensur singl currenc match singl bank system consist posit definit sovereignti gave earlier genuin bank union give citizen trust money differ nation approach moreov import posit feedback effect chain logic singl market singl currenc bank union bank union turn support singl market fragment bank system take place undermin singl money also undermin condit competit result dispers bank lend rate along nation line seen recent year let clear reason per se spanish firm abl borrow exact price dutch firm oper environ firm differ reason affect credit risk therefor rate borrow singl market spanish firm abl borrow spanish bank price would borrow dutch bank case risk premium paid bank client one countri idiosyncrat system longer truli singl market capit locat would matter bank union aim revers europ bank union even import us two third firm extern financ take place form bank loan small mediums enterpris share even higher us contrast role bank firm extern financ onethird even less henc bank union crucial also euro area real economi reason ask bank union import becom appar last year main reason potenti financi fragment euro area recognis policymak observ fulli appreci extent diverg fundament differ economi could feed bank system appli notabl sovereign debt twoway interact sovereign distress bank distress certain bank union play major role break vicious circl see europ bank sovereign also strong onus govern ensur sovereign debt perform expect function financi system riskfre safe asset let therefor briefli turn fiscal polici welcom govern euro area made signific progress consolid budget henc remov sovereign risk financi system primari fiscal deficit euro area fallen gdp around unit state comparison around gdp said need ensur time consist know experi first decad euro fiscal rule enshrin maastricht treati suffici bind market disciplin likewis work effect way reason ecb long argu favour move toward effect rule fiscal domain convinc crucial stabil common currenc longer term therefor encourag policymak europ take signific step strengthen common fiscal rule step includ new way deal countri compli recommend european commiss includ give commiss right inspect nation budget go nation parliament power us feder govern state includ insert balanc budget rule nation constitut equival look forward full transpar implement new regim chang extent repres transfer power european level bank union view loss sovereignti rather see strengthen fiscal pillar manner lend credibl fiscal polici way restor efficaci polici union whole countri less affect spillov fiscal difficulti integr financi market also member state budget stabilis capac automat stabilis diminish govern unabl run deficit low point cycl put differ credit govern deterior point debt longer regard safe asset inde credit govern impair behav like privat credit govern relat cost borrow increas precis time need borrow one see real loss sovereignti prevent nation govern use normal fiscal polici macroeconom stabilis sens step restor faith public credit credibl fiscal rule restor abil govern exercis function citizen expect particular import monetari union burden macroeconom stabilis cannot entir shift onto shoulder central bank monetari polici mandat deliv mediumterm price stabil euro area whole fiscal polici absorb idiosyncrat asymmetr shock nation level unlik unit state fiscal polici decentralis stabilis take place entir subfeder nation level euro area howev fiscal rule institut credibl ampl scope nation polici perform role overal chang take place euro area make monetari union robust nation level consolid structur reform help countri reach sustain extern posit european level approach balanc compet taken combin provid effect stabilis said would seem misplac exclud time euro area may move new equilibrium integr dynam process need certain degre humil lead look us see strengthen union differ stage stage eventu beget next creation feder reserv system exampl follow twenti year later creation fdic key pillar america bank union feder budget also develop signific time europ today way undergo analog process analog sens destin know analog guid principl like us orient pragmat driven desir polici efficaci provid function citizen expect govern draw polici conclus follow time relev dark day crisi mani comment side atlant look euro area convinc would fail wrong mediumterm macro view euro area creat job us sinc unemploy rate increas euro area us crisi employ rate us fallen euro area make figur difficult compar wrong fundament way underestim depth european commit euro mistook euro fix exchang rate regim fact irrevers singl currenc irrevers born commit european nation closer integr commit nobel committe recognis last year root desir peac secur transcend nation differ larg literatur market develop protect properti right rule law exampl environ properti right well defin protect entrepreneuri activ focus innov rather predat earli refer w j baumol entrepreneurship product unproduct destruct journal polit economi pp r nurks intern currenc experi geneva leagu nation r mundel optimum currenc area columbia univers extend version luncheon speech present tel aviv univers decemb see among other p lane real effect emu cepr discuss paper paper state emu inde contribut greater econom integr howev econom linkag rest world also grow strong relat import intraemu trade dramat increas quot delor report extent market forc exert disciplinari influenc howev constraint impos market forc might either slow weak sudden disrupt bayoumi et al howev provid evid favour market disciplin us data see bayoumi m goldstein g woglom credit market disciplin sovereign borrow evid u state journal money credit bank pp reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en