Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament,25-04-2012,European Central Bank,ECB,1900,"<p>Madam Chair,Honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs,It is a pleasure to be back here in Parliament and in front of your Committee for our regular exchange of views.Accolgo con soddisfazione l’esito delle riunioni di primavera di aumentare le risorse del Fondo monetario internazionale (FMI) di 430 miliardi di dollari. L’area dell’euro ha fatto la sua parte accrescendo le proprie protezioni e impegnandosi a fornire al FMI un importo aggiuntivo di 150 miliardi di euro. Sono lieto che ora altri azionisti del Fondo si siano offerti di prestare il proprio contributo per incrementarne le risorse.Il est maintenant d’une importance cruciale que le Mécanisme de Stabilité européen soit entièrement opérationnel. La BCE peut fournir son soutien à cet égard. Naturellement, même avec un pare-feu important en place, les pays de la zone euro doivent continuer à mettre en œuvre les ajustements budgétaires et structurels qui s’imposent.Wie üblich, werde ich zuerst auf die aktuelle wirtschaftliche Lage im Eurogebiet eingehen. Danach werde ich mich den Themen zuwenden, die Sie vorgeschlagen haben: Bewertung der Sondermaßnahmen der EZB und Bewertung der wirtschaftlichen Ungleichgewichte in der Währungsunion. Let me first focus on economic and monetary developments in the euro area since our previous meeting on 19 December last year. Available indicators for the first quarter of 2012 broadly confirm a stabilisation in economic activity at a low level. Latest developments in survey data are mixed, highlighting prevailing uncertainty. Looking ahead, growth should be supported by foreign demand, the very low short-term interest rates as well as our non-standard measures. At the same time, downside risks relate in particular to a renewed intensification of tensions in euro area sovereign debt markets and their potential spillover to the real economy. Further increases in commodity prices may also hamper economic activity.Euro area annual inflation was 2.7% in March, unchanged from the previous three months. Inflation is likely to stay above 2% in the course of this year, because of recent increases in energy prices and indirect taxes. The Governing Council continues to expect annual inflation rates to fall below 2% in early 2013. Looking forward, in an environment of modest growth in the euro area and well-anchored inflation expectations, underlying price pressures should remain modest. Risks to the outlook for price developments are broadly balanced. Upside risks could stem from higher than expected oil prices and further indirect tax increases; downside risks could arise from weaker than expected economic activity. Let me stress that the Governing Council will pay particular attention to any signs of pass-through from higher energy prices to wages, profits and general price-setting. It is essential that medium-term inflation expectations for the euro area economy continue to be firmly anchored in line with the Governing Council’s aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The monetary analysis, in particular the subdued pace of underlying money growth, confirms the prospect of price developments remaining in line with price stability over the policy-relevant horizon. Money and credit data up to February point to a stabilisation of financial conditions. At the same time, the demand for credit remains weak in the light of still subdued economic activity and the continuing process of balance sheet adjustment in non-financial sectors. I consider it of crucial importance that banks strengthen their resilience further, including by retaining earnings and by retaining bonus payments. The soundness of banks’ balance sheets will be a key factor in facilitating both an appropriate provision of credit to the economy and the normalisation of their funding channels. I would now like to turn to the effectiveness of the latest Eurosystem non-standard monetary policy measures, in particular the long-term refinancing operations (LTROs).Let me first of all be clear about why we implemented the three-year LTROs.As you will remember, the second half of 2011 was marked by an intensification of stress in sovereign debt markets and an environment of high uncertainty. This increasingly hampered the access of euro area banks to market-based funding. If no action had been taken, this could have resulted in severe strains on bank lending to firms and households and a generalised selling of assets. The LTROs contributed to alleviate these very difficult funding conditions. Banks could satisfy their additional liquidity needs, which is reflected by a net liquidity injection of around €520 billion, taking into account the shifting of liquidity out of other operations. Moreover, banks have benefited from more certainty about their medium-term funding due to the longer maturity of the new operations. I understand that you are particularly interested in the transmission of the LTROs to the real economy. This is indeed a crucial point: ensuring that the ECB’s monetary policy continues to be transmitted effectively to the real economy was a key motivation of the Governing Council decision. It is encouraging to observe that a very large number of small banks have participated in the two LTROs. Small banks are best placed to refinance the real economy, in particular small- and medium-sized firms which are the biggest generator of employment in the economy. We are confident that central bank liquidity has come very close to the real economy. Of course, this does not mean that this will by itself boost lending to firms and households. First, the central bank cannot interfere with the banks’ use of the liquidity since that is their business decision. But we trust that they will use it to refinance the real economy because that is the role of a banking system. Second, the future evolution of credit growth will depend essentially on demand. In the current environment, this is likely to remain subdued. Thus, money and credit growth may stay weak for some time before the overall economic situation improves. The Bank Lending Survey, with some new information about financing conditions will be published at 10 am this morning. Some of you may worry about the possible inflationary risks arising from these non-standard measures. Let me emphasize that our non-standard measures are not a constraint on setting interest rates in line with what is required to ensure price stability in the medium term. In particular, the interest rate on the 3-year LTROs is not fixed, but linked to the prevailing main policy interest rate. Furthermore, for measuring monetary liquidity, it is not the balance sheet of the Eurosystem that is relevant, but the balance sheet of the banking sector itself. Only the latter shows the interaction with the real economy. And this is captured by monetary data and credit data which, as I have mentioned, are still very subdued. You can rest assured that the Governing Council will use all the instruments at its disposal to counter possible upside risks to price stability should they materialise.We also hear concerns that the Eurosystem is exposing itself to excessive risks. I would like to underscore that the expansion of our balance sheet is being managed with extreme prudence. We continually review collateral eligibility and our risk control framework. Furthermore, the application of conservative risk control measures, such as haircuts, in all monetary policy operations protects the soundness of the Eurosystem’s financial position.Let me conclude this point by recalling that all non-standard measures are temporary in nature. Moreover, liquidity support cannot substitute for capital or for sound fiscal and structural policies that bring about sustainable growth and stability in the European economy. Now, I would like to discuss the second topic selected for our exchange of views, namely macroeconomic imbalances in the euro area.Of course, divergences of economic developments are a normal feature within a monetary union. Such divergences can also be observed on the other side of the Atlantic. But they should not become of a persistent and structural nature.Unfortunately, very large imbalances were allowed to accumulate over recent years in several European countries. These imbalances stemmed from different sources: insufficient fiscal discipline, financial excesses, failure to implement structural reforms especially, but not exclusively, in the labour and product markets and significant competitiveness losses. All of this necessitates urgent and resolute adjustment. Clearly, it cannot be the responsibility of the ECB to address these imbalances. From the perspective of monetary policy, our primary objective is to maintain price stability in the euro area as a whole. For that purpose, the ECB continuously monitors all relevant information from the countries and various business sectors of the euro area. But the monetary policy stance of the ECB has to be focused on the entire euro area. It cannot address divergences among individual euro area countries. That is the task of governments: they must undertake determined policy actions to address major weaknesses in the fiscal, financial and structural domains. We note that progress is being made in many countries. These measures need to be complemented by growth-enhancing structural reforms to facilitate entrepreneurial activities, the start-up of new firms and job creation. Here, governments should be more ambitious. At the European level, there has been substantial progress towards reinforcing the economic governance framework. We have seen a strengthening of the fiscal rules of the Stability and Growth Pact and the introduction of the Fiscal Compact, about which we spoke in the Parliament last December. And we are implementing the new focus on correcting macroeconomic imbalances. The recent crisis has shown that a well-functioning EMU needs not only a strong institutional set-up for monetary policy at the centre, but also one for economic policies. Ensuring competitiveness of all euro area countries should be seen as a common responsibility. I am sure many of you here in the European Parliament will agree that we need a change in the mindset of how national policy-making is conducted and perceived. The economic policies of euro area countries are, ultimately, domestic policies for the euro area. Precisely because of spill-over effects, they must be subject to mutual surveillance, and corrected if required in the collective interest of the euro area as a whole. This should apply both to fiscal and macroeconomic policies. But surveillance alone is not sufficient. Citizens also expect from Europe common answers to the common challenges which all euro area countries are facing. In a context of global competition and ongoing fiscal consolidation, euro area countries should join their forces. Given that they share a single currency, they have even stronger reasons than other countries to work together. This can be in the field of research and development, education or infrastructure, they should strive for cooperation as much as possible. Let me add that, just like competitiveness, I see financial stability clearly as a common responsibly in a monetary union. During the crisis, we have observed strong negative spill-over effects across euro area countries and between the banking sector and its respective sovereign. National supervisors and Treasuries are also confronted with the well-known problem that during good times, large banks work as European institutions but in bad times fall on national shoulders. Ensuring a well-functioning EMU implies strengthening banking supervision and resolution at European level.European integration has brought peace and prosperity. While I hesitate to sketch out the long-term end point of the integration process, I am convinced that we need to actively step up our reflections about the longer term vision for Europe as we have done in the past at other defining moments in the history of our union. Thank you for your attention.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",madam chair honour member committe econom monetari affair pleasur back parliament front committe regular exchang view accolgo con soddisfazion l esito dell riunioni di primavera di aumentar le risors del fondo monetario internazional fmi di miliardi di dollari l area dell euro ha fatto la sua part accrescendo le propri protezioni e impegnandosi fornir al fmi un importo aggiuntivo di miliardi di euro sono lieto che ora altri azionisti del fondo si siano offerti di prestar il proprio contributo per incrementarn le risors il est mainten d une import crucial que le mécanism de stabilité européen soit entièr opérationnel la bce peut fournir son soutien à cet égard naturel même avec un parefeu import en place les pay de la zone euro doivent continu à mettr en œuvr les ajust budgétair et structurel qui impos wie üblich werd ich zuerst auf die aktuell wirtschaftlich lage im eurogebiet eingehen danach werd ich mich den themen zuwenden die sie vorgeschlagen haben bewertung der sondermaßnahmen der ezb und bewertung der wirtschaftlichen ungleichgewicht der währungsunion let first focus econom monetari develop euro area sinc previous meet decemb last year avail indic first quarter broad confirm stabilis econom activ low level latest develop survey data mix highlight prevail uncertainti look ahead growth support foreign demand low shortterm interest rate well nonstandard measur time downsid risk relat particular renew intensif tension euro area sovereign debt market potenti spillov real economi increas commod price may also hamper econom activ euro area annual inflat march unchang previous three month inflat like stay cours year recent increas energi price indirect tax govern council continu expect annual inflat rate fall earli look forward environ modest growth euro area wellanchor inflat expect under price pressur remain modest risk outlook price develop broad balanc upsid risk could stem higher expect oil price indirect tax increas downsid risk could aris weaker expect econom activ let stress govern council pay particular attent sign passthrough higher energi price wage profit general priceset essenti mediumterm inflat expect euro area economi continu firm anchor line govern council aim maintain inflat rate close medium term monetari analysi particular subdu pace under money growth confirm prospect price develop remain line price stabil policyrelev horizon money credit data februari point stabilis financi condit time demand credit remain weak light still subdu econom activ continu process balanc sheet adjust nonfinanci sector consid crucial import bank strengthen resili includ retain earn retain bonus payment sound bank balanc sheet key factor facilit appropri provis credit economi normalis fund channel would like turn effect latest eurosystem nonstandard monetari polici measur particular longterm refinanc oper ltros let first clear implement threeyear ltros rememb second half mark intensif stress sovereign debt market environ high uncertainti increas hamper access euro area bank marketbas fund action taken could result sever strain bank lend firm household generalis sell asset ltros contribut allevi difficult fund condit bank could satisfi addit liquid need reflect net liquid inject around billion take account shift liquid oper moreov bank benefit certainti mediumterm fund due longer matur new oper understand particular interest transmiss ltros real economi inde crucial point ensur ecb monetari polici continu transmit effect real economi key motiv govern council decis encourag observ larg number small bank particip two ltros small bank best place refin real economi particular small mediums firm biggest generat employ economi confid central bank liquid come close real economi cours mean boost lend firm household first central bank cannot interfer bank use liquid sinc busi decis trust use refin real economi role bank system second futur evolut credit growth depend essenti demand current environ like remain subdu thus money credit growth may stay weak time overal econom situat improv bank lend survey new inform financ condit publish morn may worri possibl inflationari risk aris nonstandard measur let emphas nonstandard measur constraint set interest rate line requir ensur price stabil medium term particular interest rate year ltros fix link prevail main polici interest rate furthermor measur monetari liquid balanc sheet eurosystem relev balanc sheet bank sector latter show interact real economi captur monetari data credit data mention still subdu rest assur govern council use instrument dispos counter possibl upsid risk price stabil materialis also hear concern eurosystem expos excess risk would like underscor expans balanc sheet manag extrem prudenc continu review collater elig risk control framework furthermor applic conserv risk control measur haircut monetari polici oper protect sound eurosystem financi posit let conclud point recal nonstandard measur temporari natur moreov liquid support cannot substitut capit sound fiscal structur polici bring sustain growth stabil european economi would like discuss second topic select exchang view name macroeconom imbal euro area cours diverg econom develop normal featur within monetari union diverg also observ side atlant becom persist structur natur unfortun larg imbal allow accumul recent year sever european countri imbal stem differ sourc insuffici fiscal disciplin financi excess failur implement structur reform especi exclus labour product market signific competit loss necessit urgent resolut adjust clear cannot respons ecb address imbal perspect monetari polici primari object maintain price stabil euro area whole purpos ecb continu monitor relev inform countri various busi sector euro area monetari polici stanc ecb focus entir euro area cannot address diverg among individu euro area countri task govern must undertak determin polici action address major weak fiscal financi structur domain note progress made mani countri measur need complement growthenhanc structur reform facilit entrepreneuri activ startup new firm job creation govern ambiti european level substanti progress toward reinforc econom govern framework seen strengthen fiscal rule stabil growth pact introduct fiscal compact spoke parliament last decemb implement new focus correct macroeconom imbal recent crisi shown wellfunct emu need strong institut setup monetari polici centr also one econom polici ensur competit euro area countri seen common respons sure mani european parliament agre need chang mindset nation policymak conduct perceiv econom polici euro area countri ultim domest polici euro area precis spillov effect must subject mutual surveil correct requir collect interest euro area whole appli fiscal macroeconom polici surveil alon suffici citizen also expect europ common answer common challeng euro area countri face context global competit ongo fiscal consolid euro area countri join forc given share singl currenc even stronger reason countri work togeth field research develop educ infrastructur strive cooper much possibl let add like competit see financi stabil clear common respons monetari union crisi observ strong negat spillov effect across euro area countri bank sector respect sovereign nation supervisor treasuri also confront wellknown problem good time larg bank work european institut bad time fall nation shoulder ensur wellfunct emu impli strengthen bank supervis resolut european level european integr brought peac prosper hesit sketch longterm end point integr process convinc need activ step reflect longer term vision europ done past defin moment histori union thank attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en