Vítor Constâncio: Beyond traditional banking: a new credit system coming out of the shadows,17-10-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,3941,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,Let me begin by thanking the conference organisers and program directors of the SAFE (Sustainable Architecture for Finance in Europe) Policy Center, Hans-Helmut Kotz and Jan Pieter Krahnen, for the kind invitation to speak at this 2nd Frankfurt Conference on Financial Market Policy.The topic of this 2nd Frankfurt Conference is very well chosen. Clearly the organisers at the SAFE Policy Center recognise that the provision of credit to the euro area real economy as well as some of the risks that this may entail, also occurs beyond the regulatory perimeter of banks, a topic which was discussed in depth at the 1st Frankfurt Conference on Financial Market Policy organised last year. I noted that you decided to name this conference “Banking Beyond Banks” rather than “Shadow Banking” which is a term that is often used. For some reason, the term “shadow banking” has acquired a pejorative connotation in some quarters. There is no justification for that. The expression “Banking Beyond Banks”, or “Non-bank Banking”, which I learnt is Hans-Helmut’s preference, on the other hand, is less of a loaded term because it implicitly also acknowledges non-banks’ contribution to the financing of the real economy. My remarks will first focus on the non-bank banking that takes place in the euro area. I will then elaborate on some potential risks to financial stability, and end with some thoughts about regulatory challenges and macro-prudential policies aimed at managing such risks.The FSB (2012) [1] defines shadow banking as “credit intermediation involving entities and activities (fully or partially) outside the regular banking system.” The different work streams created by the FSB to analyse the issue include indeed both entities and activities. However, in its regular Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report, the FSB focuses much more on entities that, being non-banks are involved in credit intermediation, than on activities. The reason for that is very much connected with the lack of data to do otherwise, as I will explain later. From the perspective of institutions, the broadest measure of the euro area shadow banking sector, akin to the broad measure proposed by the Financial Stability Board (FSB), refers to the assets of Money Market Funds (MMFs) and “Other Financial Intermediaries” (OFIs) that include all non-monetary financial institutions apart from insurance corporations and pension funds. According to our own estimates, which we supply to the FSB, this measure has more than doubled in size over the past decade and reached approximately EUR 19 trillion in the euro area [2]  The growing importance of the sector within the financial system has gathered pace over the past two years as euro area banks have been deleveraging, while shadow banking entities, in particular investment funds, have expanded further. For instance, while the banking sector’s total assets have decreased by 11% since 2012, the total assets of investment funds have increased by 30%. Caveats must however be made about this aggregate figure since a significant residual of about 40% of the data refers to a broad and unspecified sector (institutions whose detailed balance sheet statistics are still not available). On the basis of national financial accounts and securities statistics compiled by the ECB, it is our understanding that most of this residual relates to entities located in the Netherlands and Luxembourg and is composed of single entities, holding companies or special financial institutions, that are set up mainly by non-financial corporations and that are very likely not engaged in non-bank banking because they are not involved in credit intermediation. We hope to obtain better information in the future to exclude these entities from that residual category. Similar problems occur in other jurisdictions and affect the estimated total size of the shadow banks of USD 75 trillion quoted by the FSB. The ECB has in recent years collected balance sheet data on investment funds and financial vehicle corporations located in the euro area, and this collection has shed some light on the composition of the shadow banking system. Important changes have taken place within the system that can be linked back to three by-products of the financial crisis. First, the very low interest rate environment has created challenges for money market funds (MMFs) and their assets shrank from a pre-crisis peak of EUR 1.3 trillion to EUR 835 billion in mid-2014. Second, reflecting the collapse in securitisation activity, the assets of financial vehicle corporations involved in securitisations located in the euro area shrank by almost a third to EUR 1.9 trillion over that period. Third, the decline in money market funds and financial vehicle corporations has been more than offset by the strong growth of the euro area (non-MMF) investment fund sector. Against a backdrop of a shift towards market-based financing and, more recently, an intense global search for yield, the (non-MMF) euro area investment funds sector has rose to EUR 8.7 trillion in mid-2014. Any monitoring of non-bank banking based on such an “entities-based approach” should however be complemented by an “activities-based approach” that focuses on intermediation activities conducted primarily through markets. What is included in this perspective are a vast array of services related to securitisation transactions, securities financing transactions (SFTs), securities lending and repos, collateral management and intermediation, the development of derivatives allowing for risk transformation and exchange via swaps, from credit default swaps to interest rate or forex swaps. Several of these activities can be conducted by regulated banks or by non-specifically regulated institutions. Basically, two aspectsmake the collection of these activities relevant: first, they contributed to the creation of a type of capital market lending system with secured short-term market funding; second, these services originate forms of liquidity instruments that are forms of money not counted in the usual monetary aggregates that we calculate. These two features – the emergence of a new market credit system and the significance of forms of money not viewed as such – is what justifies the “shadow banking” designation. That is why some authors [3] reserve designation of shadow banking to a definition confined to this type of activities. The origins of this new credit system are related to the emergence of very sizeable cash pools that could not find safety in banks’ insured deposits and were looking for safer ways of placing that cash in the short term. [4] Secured collateral lending and repos as well as risk transformation via swap derivatives (credit, interest rates and forex) were developed for that purpose. Securities lending for shorting and generating collateralised levered transactions for asset managers were also part of the new system. The activities of re-hypothecation and re-use of securities amplified the creation of chains of inside liquidity and higher leverage with negative consequences when the crisis led to an increase in haircuts and illiquidity in the repo market. Fortunately, the FSB has recently established a working group tasked with examining the possible harmonisation of regulatory approaches to re-hypothecation of client assets and the possible financial stability issues related to collateral re-use. In light of the underlying financial stability risks and its huge importance in financial markets, I very much welcome this work, which takes a broad and macro-prudential view on these issues. The activity of the shadow banking sector escapes both the monetary statistics and the flow-of-funds accounts. Zolten Pozsar proposes the development of a new set of accounts to register the Flow of Collateral and the Flow of Risk. There are no good databases of securities lending or repos and they can only be developed with the collaboration of the industry as most of the operations in question are over-the-counter operations. Some time ago I launched an initiative to create such a database compiled by the ECB. Contacts with the industry and the Bank of England proved to be encouraging but other priorities imposed justifiable delays in the implementation of such an idea. What these data gaps imply is that we do not know enough about the shadow banking sector and that tackling this shortcoming must be given the highest priority. Stijn Claessens and Lev Ratnovski (2014) [5] have suggested a criterion to pin down the activities that appropriately belong to the concept of shadow banking. The nature of those activities imply large size, reduced margins and tail risks, which means that they require some sort of private or public backstop. This relates, for instance, to the provision of liquidity lines for securitisation vehicles, the use of the banks’ balance sheets (which enjoy an implicit public backstop) to operate in the repo market [6], or still, in the same market, the so-called bankruptcy-remote privileges for lenders secured on financial collateral [7]. Without these forms of implicit public support, the repo market would not have expanded the way it did. This requirement for backstops also indicates that the border between shadow banking activities and the regulated sector is more blurred than one might have thought. One important regulatory problem of this type of shadow banking is that it has increased so much in size and is now totally internationalised and embedded in the financial globalisation that it cannot enjoy the sort of public backstops that the traditional sector used to enjoy until recently, and from which it still partly benefits. As Zoltan Pozsar writes: “The global macro drivers behind the secular rise of cash pools and leveraged portfolio managers in the asset management complex are identical with the real economy drivers behind the idea of secular stagnation. As such, one way to interpret shadow banking is as the financial economy reflection of real economy imbalances caused by excess global savings, slowing potential growth, and the rising share of corporate profits relative to wages in national income”. [8] What I briefly described points to the fact that the regulation of these new realities is necessarily very difficult. Regarding regulatory efforts underway, the FSB has focused on five specific areas: to mitigate the spill-over effect between the regular banking system and the shadow banking system; to reduce the susceptibility of money market funds (MMFs) to “runs”; to assess and align the incentives associated with securitisation; to dampen risks and pro-cyclical incentives associated with securities financing transactions such as repos and securities lending that may exacerbate funding strains in times of market stress; andto assess and mitigate systemic risks posed by other shadow banking entities and activities.” [9]A few days ago, the FSB published the regulatory framework for haircuts on non-centrally cleared securities financing and repos. [10] The idea of imposing minimum haircuts in these transactions is to contain the excessive leverage created by them and also to possibly limit the subsequent volatility of such haircuts. Nevertheless, the scope of the regulation applies numerical haircut floors only to non-centrally-cleared securities financing transactions in which financing against collateral other than government securities is provided to non-banks. In addition, the framework recommends “qualitative standards for methodologies used by market participants that provide securities financing to calculate haircuts on the collateral received transactions.” The numerical haircuts vary between 0.5 % and 10% according to the type and maturity of the securities used. The immediate impact may not be very relevant but the potential role of the new instruments can become relevant. Let me now turn to the perspective of non-bank entities that perform credit intermediation and/or maturity transformation. The FSB, in the Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report [11] of last year wrote that “ Intermediating credit through non-bank channels can have important advantages and contributes to the financing of the real economy, but  such channels can also become a source of systemic risk, especially when they are structured to perform bank-like functions (e.g. maturity transformation and leverage) and when their interconnectedness with the regular banking system is strong ” In my opinion, these conditions do apply as (some) shadow banking entities are indeed structured to perform bank-like functions, in part even standing in for the declining role of a deleveraging regular banking system. Furthermore, the interconnectedness of shadow banking entities with the regular banking system is strong.  The significant expansion of the shadow banking sector can present systemic risks that need to be detected, monitored and managed. Similar to the traditional financial intermediation activities of banks, shadow bank credit intermediation involves having credit exposures, normally through purchased securities, that are of a longer maturity and are less liquid than the short term and liquid nature of their liabilities. Moreover, some of these entities are leveraged, although leverage differs greatly among various entities. For instance, the majority of the investment funds that are an important part of this sector are of the open-ended type and do not face a problem of leverage but can become vulnerable because of the degree of maturity transformation they originate. In addition, many of the open-ended funds offered by asset management firms, such as exchange-traded funds (ETFs), in essence provide a promise of (almost) daily liquidity that they may not be able to deliver under stressed conditions. The combination of potentially stretched valuations in some financial market segments and low liquidity in secondary markets could represent a systemic threat when combined with a high redemption risks for funds with significant duration mismatches, low cash buffers and with direct contagion channels such as credit lines to the regular banks.Another reason for concern stems from the fact that the shadow banking sector is highly interconnected with euro area credit institutions. Some segments of the shadow banking system play a role in the funding of the monetary financial institution (MFI) sector, while some are themselves reliant on MFIs for their funding. Therefore, difficulties in the sector can propagate quickly to the banking sector and the real economy.Another perspective about the riskiness of non-bank banking relates not to categories of entities and their bank-like structures and activities, but to the very large footprint that some individual institutions have. Many institutions have hundreds of billions or even trillions of assets under management. We have recently observed that even ordinary events, such as personnel changes, can influence financial markets, when they concern key decision makers at very large asset management firms. I already highlighted the difficulties in understanding and regulating the elusive reality of shadow banking. To enhance this understanding, a first requisite is to require the reporting of all the necessary information for regulators so that indicators of leverage and liquidity risk for the financial system as a whole can be compiled. Several entities that are included in this concept of shadow banking, like money market funds and investment funds in general, are already subject to some form of regulation. This includes rules about the composition of assets, liquidity buffers and gates or redemption fees to contain possible runs. Regarding regulation on money market funds, I think that the Commission’s proposal is adequate whereas I doubt that the solution of generalised variable net asset value (NAVs) prevailing in the US is sufficient to contain instability episodes. Hedge funds were not at the centre of the crisis and are a business that applies high fees and benefits from investors knowledgeable about the risks they incur. What is essential is the vigilance concerning the borders of regulated versus non-regulated entities and activities. We are aware that tighter regulations for banks have been one of the drivers of non-bank based activities. This so-called “boundary problem [12]” is not new. It arises because effective regulation penalises those within the regulated perimeter and causes a substitution of activities to entities outside the regulatory perimeter. Addressing this problem implies regulating the exposures that the regulated sector creates towards the non-banks and in the extreme a possible change of the regulatory perimeter. This change need not be for the entire non-bank sector, but placing systemically important non-banks within the perimeter should be possible. In the United States, non-bank systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) (designated by the U.S. Financial Stability Oversight Council) are placed under enhanced prudential supervision by the Federal Reserve Board of Governors. This step has already been implemented for some institutions (such as AIG, GE Capital, Prudential Financial), while non-bank SIFI designation is being studied for some large asset managers. The FSB, jointly with the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), is currently developing methodologies for identifying non-bank non-insurer global systemically important financial institutions (NBNI G-SIFIs). I very much welcome this Too-Big-To-Fail strand of work by the FSB and IOSCO. It will help us assess this broad and heterogeneous segment of the financial system in a way that is consistent and comparable with what the Basel Committee has already done for the so-called G-SIBs (global systemically important banks) and the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) plans to do for G-SIIs (global systemically important insurers). Once the methodology for identification of NBNI G-SIFI is agreed (in 2015), the discussion should move quickly to and focus on the appropriate incremental policy measures that these identified institutions should be subject to. Here, it is key to design measures that ensure that these entities internalise the potential costs they impose on the financial system, and at the same time provide for incentives to reduce their systemic footprint. Another aspect related with the boundary problem relates to the convenience of regulating the exposures of banks to non-banks. The Basel Committee has already defined the capital charges related to equity participations of banks in non-bank institutions. Regarding simple credit exposures, the large exposures (LE) regime could play a role in protecting banks from potentially excessive exposures to the shadow banking sector and in moving contagion risk from shadow banks back into the core banking sector. Currently, shadow banking exposures are not singled out for specific treatment within the Basel Committee’s LE Rules that were agreed on earlier this year. However, exposures of individual banks to shadow banks are subject to the general LE limit. This means that a single exposure to a shadow banking entity cannot be greater than 25% of a bank’s Tier 1 capital. Also here, we may need to go beyond and acquire additional macro-prudential tools that focus on the overall exposure to sectors, and in this context to the shadow banking sector. In the EU, the European Banking Authority is currently developing guidelines for the setting of specific LE limits to shadow banking entities across the EU (both at the individual exposure and at the aggregate level). Another aspect that requires quicker implementation concerns the regulation of Central Counterparties (CCPs) creating a true level playing field at the international level. I already mentioned the importance of the centralised settlement of securities transactions, including repos that are at the core of shadow banking. These transactions are exempt from the regulatory minima recently published by the FSB because CCPs apply their own margin requirements. The essential questions concern the liquidity requirements that CCPs should implement and the not-yet solved problem of the resolution regime for CCPs. We are seeing a progressive significant concentration in the sector internationally and this accentuates the systemic nature of these institutions. An appropriate resolution regime that addresses the too-big-to-fail problem is becoming urgent and the ongoing work has to be accelerated. Another aspect of the regulation could be the possibility of giving to the macro-prudential authorities the power to set countercyclical margin add-ons which CCPs need to add to the minimum requirement. This may be most relevant in ebullient times when low volatility and reduced counterparty credit risk may lead to insufficient margin requirements. When the financial cycle turns, macro-prudential add-ons can be released, ensuring higher shock absorbing capacity of CCPs. The current process of structural change in the banking sector [13] will also have a permanent effect on the structure of intermediation in the euro area more broadly. Banks have historically played a dominant role in the financing of the euro area real economy. I expect that the future of intermediation will show some rebalancing away from the very high levels of bank-based intermediation towards more capital market-based intermediation of the euro area economy. We have over the past few years already observed the start of such a rebalancing, as euro area banks have been deleveraging, while shadow banking entities, in particular investment funds, have expanded further. This process is likely to continue in the coming years. However, I do not think that this process should go too far and completely replicate the US structure as dominance of capital market-based financing brings opportunities but also brings more volatility. From a financial stability perspective, a balanced mix between bank and non-bank banking is preferable. Non-bank banking can indeed have a number of benefits such as enlarging the real economy’s access to credit, supporting market liquidity and enabling sharing of risk. However, non-bank banking can also be a risk to the stability of the financial system [14]. As we observed in the early stages of the global financial crisis, some highly leveraged non-bank entities, such as the broker dealers in the US, held large amounts of illiquid assets and were vulnerable to investor runs. These led to fire sales of assets which in turn depressed asset valuations and caused a contagion of stress to regular banks. In order to adequately monitor such risks and prevent them from materialising, we need to have the data that allows for an adequate assessment of leverage in the overall financial system, as well as of liquidity, maturity mismatch, and the interconnectedness between institutions both inside and outside the regulated perimeter. Reducing contagion risk from shadow banks to the core banking sector is a challenge that requires permanent vigilance of the “boundary problem” and the use of the proper instruments to safeguard the overall stability of the financial system. The outcome that we should strive for is to build the Sustainable Architecture for Finance in Europe (SAFE), surely a familiar concept here at the SAFE Policy Center of Goethe University. Thank you for your attention. Total assets of banks and non-banks (Q1 1999 - Q1 2014; EUR trillions)Source: ECB and ECB calculations.[1]Financial Stability Board (FSB ) 2012, “Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking,” Consultative Document.[2]See “Structural features of the wider euro area financial system”, ECB, Banking Structures Report, October 2014[3]See among others, Shin H.S. (2009), “Financial Intermediation and the Post-Crisis Financial System”, BIS Annual Conference; Adrian T., H.S. Shin (2009), “The Shadow Banking System: Implications for Financial Regulation”, Banque de France Financial Stability Review 13:1–10; Pozsar Z., T. Adrian, A.B. Ashcraft, H. Boesky (2010), “Shadow Banking”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 458; Claessens S, Z. Pozsar, L. Ratnovski and M. Singh (2012), “Shadow Banking: Economics and Policy”, IMF Staff Discussion Notes 12/12; Mehrling P., Z. Pozsar, J. Sweeny, and D.Neilson, (2013) “Bagehot was a Shadow Banker: Shadow Banking, Central Banking and the Future of Global Finance”, Institute of New Economic Thinking; Pozsar, Z. (2014) “Shadow Banking: The Money view”, Office of Financial Research Working Paper 14-04; Claessens S. and L. Ratnovski (2014), “What Is Shadow Banking?” IMF Working Paper 14/25. [4]Pozsar, Z. (2011) “Institutional Cash Pools and the Triffin Dilemma of the U.S. Banking System”, IMF Working Paper 11/190[5]Claessens S. and L.Ratnovski (2014) “What Is Shadow Banking?”, IMF Working Paper14 /25[6]Singh M. (2012), “Puts in the shadow”, IMF Working Paper 12/229[7]Perotti E. (2013), “The roots of shadow banking”, CEPR Policy Insight 69[8]Pozsar, Z. (2014) “ Shadow Banking: The Money View”, Office of Financial Research WP 14-04[9]FSB (2013) Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking: Policy Framework for Addressing Shadow Banking Risks in Securities Lending and Repos”, August 2013[10]FSB (2014) “Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking: Regulatory framework for haircuts on non-centrally cleared securities financing transactions”, October 2014[11]FSB (2013), Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report 2013, 14 November 2013.[12]See Goodhart, C. (2008), “The Boundary problem in financial regulation”, National Institute Economic Review, Vol. 206, No 1, pp 48-55[13]See “Banking union and the future of banking”, speech by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, at the IIEA Conference on “the Future of Banking in Europe”, Dublin, 2 December 2013.[14]See also October 2014 IMF Global Financial Stability Report, Chapter 2: Shadow banking around the globe: how large, and how risky.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen let begin thank confer organis program director safe sustain architectur financ europ polici center hanshelmut kotz pieter krahnen kind invit speak nd frankfurt confer financi market polici topic nd frankfurt confer well chosen clear organis safe polici center recognis provis credit euro area real economi well risk may entail also occur beyond regulatori perimet bank topic discuss depth st frankfurt confer financi market polici organis last year note decid name confer bank beyond bank rather shadow bank term often use reason term shadow bank acquir pejor connot quarter justif express bank beyond bank nonbank bank learnt hanshelmut prefer hand less load term implicit also acknowledg nonbank contribut financ real economi remark first focus nonbank bank take place euro area elabor potenti risk financi stabil end thought regulatori challeng macroprudenti polici aim manag risk fsb defin shadow bank credit intermedi involv entiti activ fulli partial outsid regular bank system differ work stream creat fsb analys issu includ inde entiti activ howev regular global shadow bank monitor report fsb focus much entiti nonbank involv credit intermedi activ reason much connect lack data otherwis explain later perspect institut broadest measur euro area shadow bank sector akin broad measur propos financi stabil board fsb refer asset money market fund mmfs financi intermediari ofi includ nonmonetari financi institut apart insur corpor pension fund accord estim suppli fsb measur doubl size past decad reach approxim eur trillion euro area grow import sector within financi system gather pace past two year euro area bank deleverag shadow bank entiti particular invest fund expand instanc bank sector total asset decreas sinc total asset invest fund increas caveat must howev made aggreg figur sinc signific residu data refer broad unspecifi sector institut whose detail balanc sheet statist still avail basi nation financi account secur statist compil ecb understand residu relat entiti locat netherland luxembourg compos singl entiti hold compani special financi institut set main nonfinanci corpor like engag nonbank bank involv credit intermedi hope obtain better inform futur exclud entiti residu categori similar problem occur jurisdict affect estim total size shadow bank usd trillion quot fsb ecb recent year collect balanc sheet data invest fund financi vehicl corpor locat euro area collect shed light composit shadow bank system import chang taken place within system link back three byproduct financi crisi first low interest rate environ creat challeng money market fund mmfs asset shrank precrisi peak eur trillion eur billion mid second reflect collaps securitis activ asset financi vehicl corpor involv securitis locat euro area shrank almost third eur trillion period third declin money market fund financi vehicl corpor offset strong growth euro area nonmmf invest fund sector backdrop shift toward marketbas financ recent intens global search yield nonmmf euro area invest fund sector rose eur trillion mid monitor nonbank bank base entitiesbas approach howev complement activitiesbas approach focus intermedi activ conduct primarili market includ perspect vast array servic relat securitis transact secur financ transact sfts secur lend repo collater manag intermedi develop deriv allow risk transform exchang via swap credit default swap interest rate forex swap sever activ conduct regul bank nonspecif regul institut basic two aspectsmak collect activ relev first contribut creation type capit market lend system secur shortterm market fund second servic origin form liquid instrument form money count usual monetari aggreg calcul two featur emerg new market credit system signific form money view justifi shadow bank design author reserv design shadow bank definit confin type activ origin new credit system relat emerg sizeabl cash pool could find safeti bank insur deposit look safer way place cash short term secur collater lend repo well risk transform via swap deriv credit interest rate forex develop purpos secur lend short generat collateralis lever transact asset manag also part new system activ rehypothec reus secur amplifi creation chain insid liquid higher leverag negat consequ crisi led increas haircut illiquid repo market fortun fsb recent establish work group task examin possibl harmonis regulatori approach rehypothec client asset possibl financi stabil issu relat collater reus light under financi stabil risk huge import financi market much welcom work take broad macroprudenti view issu activ shadow bank sector escap monetari statist flowoffund account zolten pozsar propos develop new set account regist flow collater flow risk good databas secur lend repo develop collabor industri oper question overthecount oper time ago launch initi creat databas compil ecb contact industri bank england prove encourag prioriti impos justifi delay implement idea data gap impli know enough shadow bank sector tackl shortcom must given highest prioriti stijn claessen lev ratnovski suggest criterion pin activ appropri belong concept shadow bank natur activ impli larg size reduc margin tail risk mean requir sort privat public backstop relat instanc provis liquid line securitis vehicl use bank balanc sheet enjoy implicit public backstop oper repo market still market socal bankruptcyremot privileg lender secur financi collater without form implicit public support repo market would expand way requir backstop also indic border shadow bank activ regul sector blur one might thought one import regulatori problem type shadow bank increas much size total internationalis embed financi globalis cannot enjoy sort public backstop tradit sector use enjoy recent still part benefit zoltan pozsar write global macro driver behind secular rise cash pool leverag portfolio manag asset manag complex ident real economi driver behind idea secular stagnat one way interpret shadow bank financi economi reflect real economi imbal caus excess global save slow potenti growth rise share corpor profit relat wage nation incom briefli describ point fact regul new realiti necessarili difficult regard regulatori effort underway fsb focus five specif area mitig spillov effect regular bank system shadow bank system reduc suscept money market fund mmfs run assess align incent associ securitis dampen risk procycl incent associ secur financ transact repo secur lend may exacerb fund strain time market stress andto assess mitig system risk pose shadow bank entiti activ day ago fsb publish regulatori framework haircut noncentr clear secur financ repo idea impos minimum haircut transact contain excess leverag creat also possibl limit subsequ volatil haircut nevertheless scope regul appli numer haircut floor noncentrallyclear secur financ transact financ collater govern secur provid nonbank addit framework recommend qualit standard methodolog use market particip provid secur financ calcul haircut collater receiv transact numer haircut vari accord type matur secur use immedi impact may relev potenti role new instrument becom relev let turn perspect nonbank entiti perform credit intermedi andor matur transform fsb global shadow bank monitor report last year wrote intermedi credit nonbank channel import advantag contribut financ real economi channel also becom sourc system risk especi structur perform banklik function e g matur transform leverag interconnected regular bank system strong opinion condit appli shadow bank entiti inde structur perform banklik function part even stand declin role deleverag regular bank system furthermor interconnected shadow bank entiti regular bank system strong signific expans shadow bank sector present system risk need detect monitor manag similar tradit financi intermedi activ bank shadow bank credit intermedi involv credit exposur normal purchas secur longer matur less liquid short term liquid natur liabil moreov entiti leverag although leverag differ great among various entiti instanc major invest fund import part sector openend type face problem leverag becom vulner degre matur transform origin addit mani openend fund offer asset manag firm exchangetrad fund etf essenc provid promis almost daili liquid may abl deliv stress condit combin potenti stretch valuat financi market segment low liquid secondari market could repres system threat combin high redempt risk fund signific durat mismatch low cash buffer direct contagion channel credit line regular bank anoth reason concern stem fact shadow bank sector high interconnect euro area credit institut segment shadow bank system play role fund monetari financi institut mfi sector reliant mfis fund therefor difficulti sector propag quick bank sector real economi anoth perspect riski nonbank bank relat categori entiti banklik structur activ larg footprint individu institut mani institut hundr billion even trillion asset manag recent observ even ordinari event personnel chang influenc financi market concern key decis maker larg asset manag firm alreadi highlight difficulti understand regul elus realiti shadow bank enhanc understand first requisit requir report necessari inform regul indic leverag liquid risk financi system whole compil sever entiti includ concept shadow bank like money market fund invest fund general alreadi subject form regul includ rule composit asset liquid buffer gate redempt fee contain possibl run regard regul money market fund think commiss propos adequ wherea doubt solut generalis variabl net asset valu nav prevail us suffici contain instabl episod hedg fund centr crisi busi appli high fee benefit investor knowledg risk incur essenti vigil concern border regul versus nonregul entiti activ awar tighter regul bank one driver nonbank base activ socal boundari problem new aris effect regul penalis within regul perimet caus substitut activ entiti outsid regulatori perimet address problem impli regul exposur regul sector creat toward nonbank extrem possibl chang regulatori perimet chang need entir nonbank sector place system import nonbank within perimet possibl unit state nonbank system import financi institut sifi design u financi stabil oversight council place enhanc prudenti supervis feder reserv board governor step alreadi implement institut aig ge capit prudenti financi nonbank sifi design studi larg asset manag fsb joint intern organ secur commiss iosco current develop methodolog identifi nonbank noninsur global system import financi institut nbni gsifi much welcom toobigtofail strand work fsb iosco help us assess broad heterogen segment financi system way consist compar basel committe alreadi done socal gsib global system import bank intern associ insur supervisor iai plan gsii global system import insur methodolog identif nbni gsifi agre discuss move quick focus appropri increment polici measur identifi institut subject key design measur ensur entiti internalis potenti cost impos financi system time provid incent reduc system footprint anoth aspect relat boundari problem relat conveni regul exposur bank nonbank basel committe alreadi defin capit charg relat equiti particip bank nonbank institut regard simpl credit exposur larg exposur le regim could play role protect bank potenti excess exposur shadow bank sector move contagion risk shadow bank back core bank sector current shadow bank exposur singl specif treatment within basel committe le rule agre earlier year howev exposur individu bank shadow bank subject general le limit mean singl exposur shadow bank entiti cannot greater bank tier capit also may need go beyond acquir addit macroprudenti tool focus overal exposur sector context shadow bank sector eu european bank author current develop guidelin set specif le limit shadow bank entiti across eu individu exposur aggreg level anoth aspect requir quicker implement concern regul central counterparti ccps creat true level play field intern level alreadi mention import centralis settlement secur transact includ repo core shadow bank transact exempt regulatori minima recent publish fsb ccps appli margin requir essenti question concern liquid requir ccps implement notyet solv problem resolut regim ccps see progress signific concentr sector intern accentu system natur institut appropri resolut regim address toobigtofail problem becom urgent ongo work acceler anoth aspect regul could possibl give macroprudenti author power set countercycl margin addon ccps need add minimum requir may relev ebulli time low volatil reduc counterparti credit risk may lead insuffici margin requir financi cycl turn macroprudenti addon releas ensur higher shock absorb capac ccps current process structur chang bank sector also perman effect structur intermedi euro area broad bank histor play domin role financ euro area real economi expect futur intermedi show rebalanc away high level bankbas intermedi toward capit marketbas intermedi euro area economi past year alreadi observ start rebalanc euro area bank deleverag shadow bank entiti particular invest fund expand process like continu come year howev think process go far complet replic us structur domin capit marketbas financ bring opportun also bring volatil financi stabil perspect balanc mix bank nonbank bank prefer nonbank bank inde number benefit enlarg real economi access credit support market liquid enabl share risk howev nonbank bank also risk stabil financi system observ earli stage global financi crisi high leverag nonbank entiti broker dealer us held larg amount illiquid asset vulner investor run led fire sale asset turn depress asset valuat caus contagion stress regular bank order adequ monitor risk prevent materialis need data allow adequ assess leverag overal financi system well liquid matur mismatch interconnected institut insid outsid regul perimet reduc contagion risk shadow bank core bank sector challeng requir perman vigil boundari problem use proper instrument safeguard overal stabil financi system outcom strive build sustain architectur financ europ safe sure familiar concept safe polici center goeth univers thank attent total asset bank nonbank q q eur trillion sourc ecb ecb calcul financi stabil board fsb strengthen oversight regul shadow bank consult document see structur featur wider euro area financi system ecb bank structur report octob see among other shin h financi intermedi postcrisi financi system bis annual confer adrian h shin shadow bank system implic financi regul banqu de franc financi stabil review pozsar z adrian b ashcraft h boeski shadow bank feder reserv bank new york staff report claessen z pozsar l ratnovski m singh shadow bank econom polici imf staff discuss note mehrl p z pozsar j sweeni d neilson bagehot shadow banker shadow bank central bank futur global financ institut new econom think pozsar z shadow bank money view offic financi research work paper claessen l ratnovski shadow bank imf work paper pozsar z institut cash pool triffin dilemma u bank system imf work paper claessen l ratnovski shadow bank imf work paper singh m put shadow imf work paper perotti e root shadow bank cepr polici insight pozsar z shadow bank money view offic financi research wp fsb strengthen oversight regul shadow bank polici framework address shadow bank risk secur lend repo august fsb strengthen oversight regul shadow bank regulatori framework haircut noncentr clear secur financ transact octob fsb global shadow bank monitor report novemb see goodhart c boundari problem financi regul nation institut econom review vol pp see bank union futur bank speech vítor constâncio vicepresid ecb iiea confer futur bank europ dublin decemb see also octob imf global financi stabil report chapter shadow bank around globe larg riski reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en