Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Globalisation – a challenge for the euro area,23-05-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,3085,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,It is a pleasure for me to be here today and share with you some thoughts on the challenges emerging from globalisation. This conference has been organised to mark the 15th anniversary of the re-introduction of the Estonian kroon. Those 15 years have seen a radical break in international trade and capital flows for Estonia as well as a complete realignment of its position in the international economy. The country’s track record over this period is truly impressive. Its per capita income moved up from around 30% of the EU-15 average in 1993 to around 60% in 2006 in purchasing power parity terms. This growth has been greatly facilitated by the trade and foreign direct investment that have resulted from Estonia’s membership of the European Union. The volume of trade between Estonia and the euro area has more than doubled over the last eight years, and Estonia has, in fact, been one of the most successful new Member States in attracting FDI inflows in per capita terms.[Slide 1: Volume of trade between EE and the euro area 1995-2006]Besides its catching-up, Estonia has also impressed me as one of the most open countries in Europe to new ideas, such as the introduction of an e-government or the use of e-payments. The Baltic countries, and especially Estonia, have been moving fast in the area of e-payments. As you can see in the next chart, Estonia has not only managed to catch up with the euro area but has actually overtaken it.[Slide 2: Per capita internet payments and card payments in Estonia and the euro area]Estonia has been part of a two-fold process, namely, the deeper economic integration of Europe and the globalisation of the international economy. I will discuss this process today from a euro area perspective, as follows: first, I will consider the impact of globalisation on euro area trade; second, I will talk about EU enlargement as an important element of globalisation. Finally, I will assess the impact of globalisation on the growth and employment performance of the euro area and highlight a few areas of structural reforms where, in my view, progress is crucial if the euro area is to reap the full benefits of globalisation. Globalisation is a driving force in today’s world and the euro area has not been sheltered from it. If we define globalisation as the increasing interdependence of economies via cross-border transactions in goods, services, natural resources, capital and labour, it appears that the process has greatly accelerated in recent years. One of its key aspects has been the increasing integration of emerging economies in Asia and in central and eastern Europe into world trade. This development has sharply increased competition that greatly tested the adjustment capabilities of industrialised economies. How has the euro area adjusted to this increasingly competitive environment? According to a recent ECB study [1], the losses in export market shares of the euro area since 1994 have been relatively small, and have mainly taken place in recent years. In contrast, both the US and Japan have experienced larger losses in their market shares although recently both have stabilised. Most of these losses in trade shares were mainly the consequence of the steep increase in China’s share of the world market.[Slide 3: World export market shares][Slide 4: World export market shares of selected euro area countries]At the same time, many indicators suggest that the euro area has been a very active participant in globalisation. Over the last decade, it has opened up significantly. Exports and imports in goods with trade partners outside the euro area increased to around 30% of GDP in 2005 from around 24% in 1998. This rise mainly reflected growing trade with Asia and the new EU Member States. Similarly, the euro area countries’ investment activity in third countries went up significantly, as part of the area’s adjustment to the global challenges. Between 1995 and 2005, extra euro-area FDI stocks increased from 21% to 34% of euro area GDP.In order to gain a deeper insight into the adjustment of the euro area compared with other regions, let us see what the relative export specialisations disclose. The next table compares the so-called revealed comparative advantages, using the method of the famous Hungarian economist Bela Balassa, dividing the export market share of a particular country with that of the world average. The chart considers four product groups based on factor intensities.According to this measure, between 1993 and 2004, euro area exporters seem to have been specialising in capital- and research-intensive but also in labour-intensive products. The specialisation of the US and Japan appears to be somewhat different. While the US has been concentrating on research-intensive products, Japan’s attention has been very much on both research- and capital-intensive products. As expected, all emerging markets have been specialising in labour-intensive areas. In addition, other emerging Asia has increasingly been turning to research-intensive products, while central and eastern Europe has increased its specialisation in capital-intensive products.[Slide 5: Revealed comparative advantages of the euro area and its main competitors by factor intensity, such as labour-, capital-, research-intensive products]These findings appear to be broadly in line with the factor intensities of the countries and regions in question. However, the specialisation of the euro area in labour-intensive areas, which has not changed much since 1993, does not seem to be in line with its relatively high capital/labour ratio. Interestingly, over the same period, other emerging Asia has become less specialised in labour-intensive products than has the euro area.[Slide 6: Physical capital/labour ratios of euro area and its main competitors]What explains this relatively moderate adjustment? While it may reflect stronger specialisation in higher-quality labour-intensive products, it may also reflect the impact of tighter product and labour market regulations than in the euro area’s main competitors. Although product market deregulation has progressed effectively since the early 1990s in the euro area, product market regulations are still tighter than in the United States. Higher regulatory burdens in the product market may have discouraged European firms to redirect their production to new areas. In particular, higher entry and exit barriers may have led to higher adjustment costs, which in turn slowed down adjustment in industrial specialisation.Similar to product market barriers, employment protection legislation also appears to be stricter in the euro area than in the United States. This may also explain the relatively slow change in industrial specialisation. When analysing the impacts of globalisation, we should not only focus on the implications of the emerging economic powers in Asia but also on the reintegration of the central and eastern European countries into the world economy. The eastern enlargement of the EU was indeed a very important part of this process.Enlargement has been clearly a win-win situation for both old and new EU Member States. Since the beginning of the transition process, a large volume of foreign direct investment has gone to the transition economies, partly in anticipation of future EU membership. Inward FDI stock in the eight countries in central and eastern European that joined the EU in 2004 grew to €211 billion in 2005. These investments have contributed to a huge technological upgrading of these countries and have fostered trade between the two previously separated halves of Europe. Enlargement has provided new trade and investment opportunities in the EU and has given investors increased economic and legal certainty in the new EU members.[Slide 7: Stocks of inward FDI in the CEE countries as percentage of GDP]The trade flows between the euro area and the new EU Member States show just how important these countries have become. The rise in the share of the 12 countries that have joined since 2004 has been quite striking in recent years, reaching around 10% of the total imports, and 13% of the total exports, of the euro area, well above that of the share of Japan, for example. This sharp rise has largely reflected increases in intra-industry trade, which are a consequence of the relocation of some of the production processes of western European companies to central and eastern Europe. This transfer has become an important part of their strategy to cope with an increasingly competitive environment.[Slide 8: Percentage share in extra-euro area trade]At the same time, it seems clear that the central and eastern European EU countries have also benefited significantly from a closer integration with the rest of the EU. All of them have enjoyed strong growth in recent years, with unemployment falling in most of these countries. Besides increasing trade flows, financial integration has been an important channel for these benefits. Over the last decade, all the new EU countries have opened up their financial systems. The massive inflow of foreign capital and transfer of know-how, mainly through European banking groups, has significantly enhanced the efficiency of financial intermediation. This, together with greater macroeconomic stability in the region, has contributed to a decrease in the cost of capital, supporting investment growth and ultimately economic growth and the catching-up process.How did the euro area economy perform in terms of growth and employment over the last decade? The available data suggest that the marked increase in trade and investment volumes contributed to GDP per capita growth, which stood at around 1.7% in the period between 1996 and 2006. Progress in employment creation was even more remarkable. Since 1995, the employment rate of the euro area increased by 6.6 percentage points, reaching 64.5% in 2006. Increases in the female employment rate and the employment rate for older workers were even higher, at 9.6 and 8.7 percentage points respectively. Over the same period, unemployment in the euro area fell by 3.1 percentage points to 8.3% in 2006. I find it especially interesting that, in spite of the increased competition from lower-cost producers, the unemployment rate of low-skilled workers declined the most in the last decade. This is a very positive development. In this context, I would like to refer to a growing concern in the industrialised nations about the impact of globalisation on their ability to sustain relatively high and evenly shared living standards. I can – to a certain extent – understand this concern. However, evidence suggests that the diverse developments in wage distributions across industrial countries (and also among EU Member States) is driven more by country-specific events than by a common, global trend. Domestic social and economic policies will continue to play a key role in a country’s internal cohesion. And as adjustment costs can be significant, it is, in my view, important to sustain a wide consensus within society that globalisation and structural changes do benefit the country as a whole. [Slide 9: Employment rates in the euro area]In spite of recent successes, the full potential has, admittedly, not yet been achieved in reaping the benefits of globalisation. Against this background, it seems clear that the euro area also has to make further progress towards a knowledge-based economy and improve its ability to adjust to the challenges of globalisation.Clearly, one of the key issues is to increase the innovative capacity of the euro area by investing more in research and development, in order to increase the pace of productivity growth. In this regard, an increased level of product market competition would certainly be beneficial, as it would increase the incentives to win new market shares by offering new and more innovative products, thus creating a higher demand for R&D. Against this background, the Lisbon agenda envisages that by 2010 EU countries spend on average 3% of their real GDP on R&D. So far, only Estonia’s neighbour Finland meets this target in the euro area; roughly 3.5% of its real GDP was spent on R&D in 2005. In contrast, the euro average of real GDP spent on R&D in 2005 amounted to just 1.9%, significantly below that of the US or Japan. The main reason for the difference appears to be the much lower involvement by the business sector in R&D. To increase this investment, it is essential to foster private spending and not only to rely on public spending. The key to success is thus to increase the share of expenditures on research and development related to GDP and to ensure the most efficient allocation of resources. Providing financial markets and, more generally, the business sector with the right incentives to get involved in R&D activities thus appears to be the key means of improving the innovation potential of the euro area. [Slide 10: Gross domestic expenditure on R&D in 2003]Closely related to innovation are investments in human capital and education. Here, the euro area can improve its innovation potential. In this field, there have been substantial improvements in the euro area, in particular concerning the educational level of young people. As the next slide shows, a significantly higher share of the 25 to 34-year-olds attained at least upper secondary education than did the 35 to 44-year-olds. Beyond the numerical aspects I would also say that education was one of the many areas where close cooperation between European countries shows its benefits, as more and more young people realise the benefits of studying abroad in Europe, learn about other cultures and recognise diversity as a strength. Looking ahead, educational policies focusing on life-long learning appears to be especially important in facilitating a smoother re-allocation of workers between sectors and firms.[Slide 11: Percentage of population with at least upper secondary education]Given the still high regulatory burden in the euro area, creating a business-friendly environment with low administrative and bureaucratic costs for firms and business start- ups appears to be of paramount importance. The statistics indicate much room for improvement in the euro area. As a recent World Bank study [2] shows, in 2006, the average cost of starting a business with up to 50 employees in the euro area amounted to roughly USD 2,226, compared with USD 285 in the US. In 2006, it took on average 22 days to set up a business in the euro area, compared with 5 days in the US. It is encouraging that since the late 1990s barriers to entrepreneurship appear to have decreased in almost all euro area countries, although they still remain relatively high in most euro area countries. [Slide 12: Regulatory burden of goods and services market]Furthermore, adjustments to the level of employment protection should be a priority, in particular where they impede the hiring of younger workers. While Europe is facing a demographic challenge, with an increasing shortage of young workers, it is striking that youth unemployment is still fairly high. In this regard, over the last decade, the euro area countries deserve some credit for progress, particularly in making temporary employment contracts more flexible. As suggested by the OECD indicator on employment protection legislation, the laws covering temporary contracts have become much less strict. As a result, for example, the share of young people working on temporary contracts rose to 50.3% in 2006, compared with 41% in 1996. However, the level of employment protection legislation for permanent contracts has only fallen slightly since 1990. It is therefore important to reform legislation on permanent contracts if it discourages employers from hiring. [Slide 13: Youth unemployment in the euro area][Slide 14: Index of employment protection legislation for temporary employment][Slide 15: Index of employment protection legislation for permanent employment]In addition, in order to fully exploit the euro area countries’ changing comparative advantages in producing goods and services it is essential that labour markets adjust quickly to changing demand conditions. This requires the right incentives for the sufficient mobility of workers, inter alia, between jobs and regions, but also from unemployment to employment. Suitable adjustment mechanisms in the euro area also require sufficient labour mobility across borders. The low level of cross-border labour mobility within the EU has to be seen in the context of cultural diversity. However, it also reflects the existence of legal and administrative barriers, moving costs, inefficient housing markets, the limited portability of pension rights and problems with the international recognition of professional qualifications [3]. Finally, let me emphasise that wage differentiation is essential for improving employment opportunities for less skilled persons and in regions with high unemployment. Generally, wage developments need to adequately reflect developments in productivity by skill level, region and industry.In conclusion, the euro area is facing an increasingly challenging competitive environment. While so far the euro area as a whole appears to have defended relatively well its market share in world trade, and has been a very active participant in world trade and foreign direct investment flows, it has adjusted its production and trade structure more slowly than have its main competitors. At the same time, the stable economic growth and increasing employment rates in both old and new Member States in recent years suggest that so far Europe has proved to be a successful model for creating growth and employment opportunities through establishing a large internal market for capital, goods, services and employment opportunities. Looking ahead, in the face of globalisation, protectionism and the shielding of jobs and industries from international competition are not an option. As I have argued in my presentation, we are certainly not witnessing a “fortress euro area”. In order to reap the full benefits of globalisation, the EU must make further efforts towards a knowledge- based economy. In this context, promoting R&D, adopting new technologies as well as upgrading workers’ skills are crucial policy steps towards achieving the Lisbon target. At the same time, lowering product market regulation unlocks productivity potential and innovation.Improving the flexibility of labour markets in the euro area seems to be equally important. In particular, labour market policies that combine flexibility with increased employment opportunities appear to be crucial to facilitate structural adjustment, permitting a smooth move away from declining and towards expanding activities.As regards Estonia, I am confident that this small and creative country will continue its successful catching-up. As I already mentioned, it has experienced an impressive increase in income levels – a trend that is likely to continue. [Slide 16: GDP per capita Estonia as % of EU-15 average]  However, we should not overlook the fact that Estonia, despite her successful reintegration into the world economy currently faces significant challenges. The country in particular needs to keep its macroeconomic imbalances (inflation, current account deficit) under control in order to ensure sustainable convergence. I wish Estonia the best of luck in tackling these challenges. In Estonian, I think you would say: Jóudu ja edu ka edaspidiseks![1] U. Baumann, F. di Mauro, (2007) “Globalisation and euro area trade interactions and challenges”, ECB Occasional Paper Series No 55.[2] World Bank Report: “Doing Business in 2006”. [3] F.F. Heinz, M. Ward-Warmedinger (2006), “Cross-border labour mobility within an enlarged EU”, ECB Occasional Paper Series No 52.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen pleasur today share thought challeng emerg globalis confer organis mark th anniversari reintroduct estonian kroon year seen radic break intern trade capit flow estonia well complet realign posit intern economi countri track record period truli impress per capita incom move around eu averag around purchas power pariti term growth great facilit trade foreign direct invest result estonia membership european union volum trade estonia euro area doubl last eight year estonia fact one success new member state attract fdi inflow per capita term slide volum trade ee euro area besid catchingup estonia also impress one open countri europ new idea introduct egovern use epay baltic countri especi estonia move fast area epay see next chart estonia manag catch euro area actual overtaken slide per capita internet payment card payment estonia euro area estonia part twofold process name deeper econom integr europ globalis intern economi discuss process today euro area perspect follow first consid impact globalis euro area trade second talk eu enlarg import element globalis final assess impact globalis growth employ perform euro area highlight area structur reform view progress crucial euro area reap full benefit globalis globalis drive forc today world euro area shelter defin globalis increas interdepend economi via crossbord transact good servic natur resourc capit labour appear process great acceler recent year one key aspect increas integr emerg economi asia central eastern europ world trade develop sharpli increas competit great test adjust capabl industrialis economi euro area adjust increas competit environ accord recent ecb studi loss export market share euro area sinc relat small main taken place recent year contrast us japan experienc larger loss market share although recent stabilis loss trade share main consequ steep increas china share world market slide world export market share slide world export market share select euro area countri time mani indic suggest euro area activ particip globalis last decad open signific export import good trade partner outsid euro area increas around gdp around rise main reflect grow trade asia new eu member state similar euro area countri invest activ third countri went signific part area adjust global challeng extra euroarea fdi stock increas euro area gdp order gain deeper insight adjust euro area compar region let us see relat export specialis disclos next tabl compar socal reveal compar advantag use method famous hungarian economist bela balassa divid export market share particular countri world averag chart consid four product group base factor intens accord measur euro area export seem specialis capit researchintens also labourintens product specialis us japan appear somewhat differ us concentr researchintens product japan attent much research capitalintens product expect emerg market specialis labourintens area addit emerg asia increas turn researchintens product central eastern europ increas specialis capitalintens product slide reveal compar advantag euro area main competitor factor intens labour capit researchintens product find appear broad line factor intens countri region question howev specialis euro area labourintens area chang much sinc seem line relat high capitallabour ratio interest period emerg asia becom less specialis labourintens product euro area slide physic capitallabour ratio euro area main competitor explain relat moder adjust may reflect stronger specialis higherqu labourintens product may also reflect impact tighter product labour market regul euro area main competitor although product market deregul progress effect sinc earli euro area product market regul still tighter unit state higher regulatori burden product market may discourag european firm redirect product new area particular higher entri exit barrier may led higher adjust cost turn slow adjust industri specialis similar product market barrier employ protect legisl also appear stricter euro area unit state may also explain relat slow chang industri specialis analys impact globalis focus implic emerg econom power asia also reintegr central eastern european countri world economi eastern enlarg eu inde import part process enlarg clear winwin situat old new eu member state sinc begin transit process larg volum foreign direct invest gone transit economi part anticip futur eu membership inward fdi stock eight countri central eastern european join eu grew billion invest contribut huge technolog upgrad countri foster trade two previous separ halv europ enlarg provid new trade invest opportun eu given investor increas econom legal certainti new eu member slide stock inward fdi cee countri percentag gdp trade flow euro area new eu member state show import countri becom rise share countri join sinc quit strike recent year reach around total import total export euro area well share japan exampl sharp rise larg reflect increas intraindustri trade consequ reloc product process western european compani central eastern europ transfer becom import part strategi cope increas competit environ slide percentag share extraeuro area trade time seem clear central eastern european eu countri also benefit signific closer integr rest eu enjoy strong growth recent year unemploy fall countri besid increas trade flow financi integr import channel benefit last decad new eu countri open financi system massiv inflow foreign capit transfer knowhow main european bank group signific enhanc effici financi intermedi togeth greater macroeconom stabil region contribut decreas cost capit support invest growth ultim econom growth catchingup process euro area economi perform term growth employ last decad avail data suggest mark increas trade invest volum contribut gdp per capita growth stood around period progress employ creation even remark sinc employ rate euro area increas percentag point reach increas femal employ rate employ rate older worker even higher percentag point respect period unemploy euro area fell percentag point find especi interest spite increas competit lowercost produc unemploy rate lowskil worker declin last decad posit develop context would like refer grow concern industrialis nation impact globalis abil sustain relat high even share live standard certain extent understand concern howev evid suggest divers develop wage distribut across industri countri also among eu member state driven countryspecif event common global trend domest social econom polici continu play key role countri intern cohes adjust cost signific view import sustain wide consensus within societi globalis structur chang benefit countri whole slide employ rate euro area spite recent success full potenti admit yet achiev reap benefit globalis background seem clear euro area also make progress toward knowledgebas economi improv abil adjust challeng globalis clear one key issu increas innov capac euro area invest research develop order increas pace product growth regard increas level product market competit would certain benefici would increas incent win new market share offer new innov product thus creat higher demand r d background lisbon agenda envisag eu countri spend averag real gdp r d far estonia neighbour finland meet target euro area rough real gdp spent r d contrast euro averag real gdp spent r d amount signific us japan main reason differ appear much lower involv busi sector r d increas invest essenti foster privat spend reli public spend key success thus increas share expenditur research develop relat gdp ensur effici alloc resourc provid financi market general busi sector right incent get involv r d activ thus appear key mean improv innov potenti euro area slide gross domest expenditur r d close relat innov invest human capit educ euro area improv innov potenti field substanti improv euro area particular concern educ level young peopl next slide show signific higher share yearold attain least upper secondari educ yearold beyond numer aspect would also say educ one mani area close cooper european countri show benefit young peopl realis benefit studi abroad europ learn cultur recognis divers strength look ahead educ polici focus lifelong learn appear especi import facilit smoother realloc worker sector firm slide percentag popul least upper secondari educ given still high regulatori burden euro area creat businessfriend environ low administr bureaucrat cost firm busi start up appear paramount import statist indic much room improv euro area recent world bank studi show averag cost start busi employe euro area amount rough usd compar usd us took averag day set busi euro area compar day us encourag sinc late barrier entrepreneurship appear decreas almost euro area countri although still remain relat high euro area countri slide regulatori burden good servic market furthermor adjust level employ protect prioriti particular imped hire younger worker europ face demograph challeng increas shortag young worker strike youth unemploy still fair high regard last decad euro area countri deserv credit progress particular make temporari employ contract flexibl suggest oecd indic employ protect legisl law cover temporari contract becom much less strict result exampl share young peopl work temporari contract rose compar howev level employ protect legisl perman contract fallen slight sinc therefor import reform legisl perman contract discourag employ hire slide youth unemploy euro area slide index employ protect legisl temporari employ slide index employ protect legisl perman employ addit order fulli exploit euro area countri chang compar advantag produc good servic essenti labour market adjust quick chang demand condit requir right incent suffici mobil worker inter alia job region also unemploy employ suitabl adjust mechan euro area also requir suffici labour mobil across border low level crossbord labour mobil within eu seen context cultur divers howev also reflect exist legal administr barrier move cost ineffici hous market limit portabl pension right problem intern recognit profession qualif final let emphasis wage differenti essenti improv employ opportun less skill person region high unemploy general wage develop need adequ reflect develop product skill level region industri conclus euro area face increas challeng competit environ far euro area whole appear defend relat well market share world trade activ particip world trade foreign direct invest flow adjust product trade structur slowli main competitor time stabl econom growth increas employ rate old new member state recent year suggest far europ prove success model creat growth employ opportun establish larg intern market capit good servic employ opportun look ahead face globalis protection shield job industri intern competit option argu present certain wit fortress euro area order reap full benefit globalis eu must make effort toward knowledg base economi context promot r d adopt new technolog well upgrad worker skill crucial polici step toward achiev lisbon target time lower product market regul unlock product potenti innov improv flexibl labour market euro area seem equal import particular labour market polici combin flexibl increas employ opportun appear crucial facilit structur adjust permit smooth move away declin toward expand activ regard estonia confid small creativ countri continu success catchingup alreadi mention experienc impress increas incom level trend like continu slide gdp per capita estonia eu averag howev overlook fact estonia despit success reintegr world economi current face signific challeng countri particular need keep macroeconom imbal inflat current account deficit control order ensur sustain converg wish estonia best luck tackl challeng estonian think would say jóudu ja edu ka edaspidisek u baumann f di mauro globalis euro area trade interact challeng ecb occasion paper seri world bank report busi f f heinz m wardwarmeding crossbord labour mobil within enlarg eu ecb occasion paper seri reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en