José Manuel González-Páramo: Address at the opening ceremony of the Euro Exhibition,16-09-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,868,"<p>Governor Iskrov,Ladies and gentlemen,It is a great pleasure for me to be here in Sofia today at the Bulgarian National Bank for the opening of the Euro Exhibition, which is dedicated to Europe’s single currency, the euro.It is remarkable that in a few months we will be celebrating the tenth anniversary of the introduction of euro banknotes and coins. They came into circulation on 1 January 2002 and replaced the legacy currencies of twelve EU Member States in what was one of the most ambitious logistical exercises ever undertaken in Europe. Since then, the euro area has grown to comprise 17 countries. Over 14 billion euro banknotes are currently in circulation and are used on a daily basis by more than 331 million inhabitants of the euro area. In fact, the euro banknotes and coins have become an important and integral part of the daily lives of citizens in the euro area. They can be seen as the most tangible symbol of European integration. Moreover, they have brought many advantages, benefiting not only euro area citizens but also the citizens of the other EU Member States, including Bulgaria. For example, Bulgarian citizens travelling within the euro area no longer need to change money when crossing from one euro area country to another. Moreover, in particular through remittances sent by Bulgarians living in the euro area, the euro has already gained a significant presence here in Bulgaria. Bulgarian enterprises can carry out transactions with business partners in all 17 euro area countries using just the euro. Bulgaria, like any other Member State without an “opt out” clause, is expected to adopt the euro at some point in the future. As you know, the road to euro adoption is well defined and the requirements are laid out in the Treaty and the Protocol on the convergence criteria. The decision to adopt the euro is a very fundamental one and should not be taken lightly. Very careful preparation is required to ensure that convergence is sustainable and participation in the euro area is successful. Appropriate economic policies are necessary not only before, but also after the adoption of the euro. The challenges that some euro area countries are currently facing illustrate the importance of sustainable convergence very clearly. Achieving an environment conducive to sustainable convergence in Bulgaria requires the conduct of economic policies geared towards ensuring overall macroeconomic stability, including sustainable price stability. Given the limited room for manoeuvre for monetary policy under the currency board arrangement, it is imperative that other policy areas provide the economy with the wherewithal to cope with country-specific shocks and to avoid the recurrence of macroeconomic imbalances. Let me emphasise in particular the role of fiscal policy, which is one of the most important macroeconomic management tools at the disposal of policy-makers. Since the accession of Bulgaria to the European Union and the European System of Central Banks in 2007, Bulgarian citizens have already become more familiar with the euro banknotes and coins. The objective of the Euro Exhibition is to improve the general public’s awareness of the euro banknotes and coins and their security features, and explain how to distinguish a genuine euro banknote from a counterfeit. The Euro Exhibition gives visitors the chance to explore subjects ranging from the history of money to the production of banknotes. As you walk around the exhibition, you will no doubt recognise the images of bridges that feature on the back of the euro banknotes. They symbolise the communication between the people of Europe and between Europe and the rest of the world. The bridges also represent the connection between the past and the present, and symbolise a common European future. The diversity of Europe is reflected on the national sides of the euro coins, which depict national icons and symbols representing the heritage and culture of each euro area country. The exhibition also has plenty to interest the younger generation. In the kids’ corner, children can play educational computer games, learn more about the features of euro banknotes from interactive displays and follow the story of Anna and Alex as they catch counterfeiters. Many other interactive components of the Euro Exhibition will appeal to both children and adults alike. The best way to learn how to check the authenticity of a euro banknote is to explore the security features showcases. And why not investigate the showcase displaying the different steps in banknote production or try to lift the weight of a gold bar? Sofia is the 11th city to play host to the Euro Exhibition. Previously the Euro Exhibition has travelled to Frankfurt, Bratislava, Barcelona, Rome, Berlin, Luxembourg, Warsaw, Tallinn, Bucharest and Paris. Several activities are planned in 2012 to mark the tenth anniversary of the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins and I would encourage you to keep checking the “euro pages” of the ECB’s website for news on the initiatives that we plan to launch. Governor Iskrov, ladies and gentlemen, I sincerely hope that you enjoy your visit to the Euro Exhibition today here in Sofia. It is a pleasure for me, on behalf of the European Central Bank, to declare the exhibition open. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",governor iskrov ladi gentlemen great pleasur sofia today bulgarian nation bank open euro exhibit dedic europ singl currenc euro remark month celebr tenth anniversari introduct euro banknot coin came circul januari replac legaci currenc twelv eu member state one ambiti logist exercis ever undertaken europ sinc euro area grown compris countri billion euro banknot current circul use daili basi million inhabit euro area fact euro banknot coin becom import integr part daili live citizen euro area seen tangibl symbol european integr moreov brought mani advantag benefit euro area citizen also citizen eu member state includ bulgaria exampl bulgarian citizen travel within euro area longer need chang money cross one euro area countri anoth moreov particular remitt sent bulgarian live euro area euro alreadi gain signific presenc bulgaria bulgarian enterpris carri transact busi partner euro area countri use euro bulgaria like member state without opt claus expect adopt euro point futur know road euro adopt well defin requir laid treati protocol converg criteria decis adopt euro fundament one taken light care prepar requir ensur converg sustain particip euro area success appropri econom polici necessari also adopt euro challeng euro area countri current face illustr import sustain converg clear achiev environ conduc sustain converg bulgaria requir conduct econom polici gear toward ensur overal macroeconom stabil includ sustain price stabil given limit room manoeuvr monetari polici currenc board arrang imper polici area provid economi wherewith cope countryspecif shock avoid recurr macroeconom imbal let emphasis particular role fiscal polici one import macroeconom manag tool dispos policymak sinc access bulgaria european union european system central bank bulgarian citizen alreadi becom familiar euro banknot coin object euro exhibit improv general public awar euro banknot coin secur featur explain distinguish genuin euro banknot counterfeit euro exhibit give visitor chanc explor subject rang histori money product banknot walk around exhibit doubt recognis imag bridg featur back euro banknot symbolis communic peopl europ europ rest world bridg also repres connect past present symbolis common european futur divers europ reflect nation side euro coin depict nation icon symbol repres heritag cultur euro area countri exhibit also plenti interest younger generat kid corner children play educ comput game learn featur euro banknot interact display follow stori anna alex catch counterfeit mani interact compon euro exhibit appeal children adult alik best way learn check authent euro banknot explor secur featur showcas investig showcas display differ step banknot product tri lift weight gold bar sofia th citi play host euro exhibit previous euro exhibit travel frankfurt bratislava barcelona rome berlin luxembourg warsaw tallinn bucharest pari sever activ plan mark tenth anniversari introduct euro banknot coin would encourag keep check euro page ecb websit news initi plan launch governor iskrov ladi gentlemen sincer hope enjoy visit euro exhibit today sofia pleasur behalf european central bank declar exhibit open reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en