Mario Draghi: Introductory remarks at the EP’s Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee,22-09-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,2032,"<p>Mr Chairman,Honourable Members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee,Ladies and Gentlemen,This hearing today takes place at a moment of change for the ECB. On 4 November, the ECB will become the banking supervisor for the euro area, including the direct supervision of 120 large banks. This marks the biggest step of European economic integration since the inception of the euro. We are well prepared for this step, but we are also conscious of the important additional responsibility we will be taking on.Additionally, over the course of the coming months, the majority of the ECB’s services will move to the new ECB premises at Frankfurt Ostend, while the SSM staff will remain in the city centre. This will also geographically underline the separation between the ECB’s new supervisory function and its other tasks. In this context, I wish to inform you that we have published today our decision on the implementation of separation between the ECB’s monetary policy and supervisory functions as required by the SSM Regulation.I know that on 3 November, on the eve of the start of single supervision, you will have ample opportunity to discuss with the Chair of the Supervisory Board. By then, the results of the Comprehensive Assessment will also be known. Against this background, I will today and in the hearings from now on focus my attention on the traditional tasks of the ECB – and in particular on monetary policy. The economic recovery in the euro area is losing momentum. Following some moderate expansion in recent quarters, growth of the euro area real GDP came to a halt in the second quarter of this year. The early information on economic conditions which we received over the summer has been somewhat weaker than expected. While industrial production and manufacturing orders in July gave some reason for optimism, more recent survey indicators have given no indication that the sharp decline registered in August has stopped. Looking ahead, we continue to expect euro area domestic demand to be supported by various factors. These include our accommodative monetary policy stance, favourable financing conditions, and structural reforms sustaining private consumption and investment. At the same time, unacceptably high unemployment and continued weak credit growth are likely to curb the strength of the recovery. The risks surrounding the expected expansion are clearly on the downside. In particular, heightened geopolitical tensions could dampen business and consumer confidence. Risks of insufficient structural reforms could weigh on the business environment.From a high of 3.0% toward the end of 2011, inflation in the euro area has been on a downward path for a considerable period of time. In August, inflation was estimated to have reached a low of 0.3% but has been revised later to 0.4%. We expect inflation to remain at low levels over the coming months, before increasing gradually during 2015 and 2016. Given the prolonged period of low inflation that we have already experienced, we will closely monitor risks to price developments looking forward. We will focus in particular on the possible repercussions of dampened growth dynamics, geopolitical developments, exchange rate developments and the pass-through of our monetary policy measures.Before turning to our latest monetary policy decisions, let me stress that the ECB has done a lot over the past three years to safeguard price stability. We successfully fought the confidence crisis in the euro that raised interest rates to abnormal levels. We provided the euro area banking system with unprecedented funding. We have continuously lowered our policy rates. Yet, against the backdrop of a persistently weak inflation outlook, a slowing growth momentum, and subdued monetary and credit dynamics, we decided in early September to adopt a number of additional monetary policy initiatives which will complete and complement the measures already announced in June. First, we lowered the key ECB interest rates by 10 basis points to their effective lower bound. The main refinancing rate now stands at 0.05%, and the deposit facility rate at -0.20%. Second, we announced further measures to enhance the functioning of monetary policy transmission, support lending to the real economy and provide further monetary accommodation given that we have now reached the lower bound. Restoring a functioning transmission, notably in bank lending, is instrumental in ensuring that the monetary policy stimulus that has been introduced reaches the final borrowers and thereby supports real incomes, spending and price formation. Following this announcement, under our ABS purchase programme (ABSPP) we will soon start purchasing simple and transparent securities with underlying assets consisting of claims against the euro area non-financial private sector. We will also start purchasing covered bonds issued by euro area MFIs under a new covered bond purchase programme (CBPP3). These measures will effectively complement and strengthen the targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) whose first allotment was just conducted a few days ago. In this respect, let me provide you with some fresh details on the outcome of the first TLTRO operation. Last Thursday, 255 banks participated in the first TLTRO for an amount of 82.6 billion euros. This is within the range of take-up values we had expected based on banks’ revealed behaviour under previous programmes. In December, banks will have another opportunity to borrow funds in the form of their TLTRO initial allowance, which entitles them to borrow a cumulative amount – between the September and the December 2014 tenders – equivalent to up to 7% of their outstanding stock of loans to the non-financial private sector excluding loans to household for house purchase. By design, the September and December operations should be assessed in combination. As of next year, there will be additional quarterly allotments in which banks will be able to receive additional funding determined by their recent lending performance. While it is yet too early to assess the impact of the TLTROs on the broader economy, their announcement already had a noticeable positive impact on financial market sentiment. Overall, we expect the TLTROs to act as a powerful tool to strengthen the transmission of monetary policy and facilitate new credit flows to the real economy, given the predominantly bank-based financing structure of the euro area economy.The additional measures we took in September will empower the credit easing impact of TLTROs in three directions. First, we expect that purchases of simple and transparent ABS will strengthen the direct pass-through effect – i.e. the extent to which the funding cost relief for banks will be passed along to their borrowers – that we can associate with the TLTROs to a measurable extent. This is because the ABS market remains severely impaired – so that the potential for interventions to change market dynamics is high in that particular market – and the link between the spreads at which ABS are traded in the secondary market and the lending rates which banks apply in the primary market of the credits that collateralise these securities is direct and tight. Second, there will be a portfolio rebalancing channel, as the expansion in liquidity that will result from the combined operations promotes a diversification of investment patterns in the investor community, and thereby an easing of financing conditions more broadly. Third, we believe the overall monetary policy package underpins our forward guidance and our determination to accomplish an expansionary stance over an extended horizon in keeping with our price stability mandate and our desire to see inflation stabilise around levels below but close to 2% over the medium term.Is the market for ABS, in particular, sufficiently ample to allow sizeable purchases? Our purchases will include a fairly wide range of simple and transparent ABS collateralised by loans to the real economy. The total stock of eligible securities which is currently outstanding – held in investors’ portfolios or retained by the originating banks – is already sizeable. We are confident that it will grow as a result of our presence in the market. Over time, as our purchases contribute to a normalisation in trading conditions, secondary market and issuance activity will expand in those segments that are currently inactive. As the experience of other central banks that have engaged in outright purchases of structured products can demonstrate, market size and purchasing volumes are to a certain extent co-determined and endogenous. Will the new initiatives magnify the Eurosystem’s exposure to risk? Outright purchases will increase the size of the ECB’s balance sheet, but the additional risk exposure will be limited. Under the ABS purchase programme we will be purchasing senior and guaranteed mezzanine tranches. Regarding senior securities, we would buy only those assets that are eligible for Eurosystem operations. So, we have ample experience with managing and understanding the risks associated with this asset class. The assets to be purchased would satisfy high standards of transparency and simplicity and are also characterised by low default risk. The large degree of credit enhancement that originators have to build into a structured financial transaction for its senior tranches to attract the high rating that will make it eligible under our programme will function as a further protective layer against losses. As for the guaranteed mezzanine tranches, their intrinsic credit risk would be comparable to that of the guarantor, be it a national or supranational entity.Covered bonds share important features with ABS, and therefore are an obvious complement to an ABS-centred programme. First, the link that is established on the issuing bank’s balance sheet between the covered bond, on the one side, and the loans that back the covered bond, on the other, is reasonably tight. As the prices for covered bonds are bid up, we expect banks to respond to the market incentives by originating more saleable covered securities, and thus more loans to collateralise them. Second, outright interventions in this market will complement ABS purchases by reinforcing the portfolio rebalancing channels of transmission and generating positive spill-overs into other markets and securities. This will further ease funding and credit conditions and will help the transmission of monetary policy.The Governing Council has emphasised that the combination of measures announced between June and September will have a sizeable impact on the ECB balance sheet, which is expected to move towards the dimensions it used to have at the beginning of 2012. With the purchase programmes, we are starting a transition from a monetary policy framework predominantly founded on passive provision of central bank credit to a more active and controlled management of our balance sheet. The Governing Council remains fully determined to counter risks to the medium-term outlook for inflation. Therefore, we stand ready to use additional unconventional instruments within our mandate, and alter the size and / or the composition of our unconventional interventions should it become necessary to further address risks of a too prolonged period of low inflation. Let me add however that the success of our measures critically depends on a number of factors outside of the realm of monetary policy. Courageous structural reforms and improvements in the competitiveness of the corporate sector are key to improving business environment. This would foster the urgently needed investment and create greater demand for credit. Structural reforms thus crucially complement the ECB’s accommodative monetary policy stance and further empower the effective transmission of monetary policy. As I have indicated now at several occasions, no monetary – and also no fiscal – stimulus can ever have a meaningful effect without such structural reforms. The crisis will only be over when full confidence returns in the real economy and in particular in the capacity and willingness of firms to take risks, to invest, and to create jobs. This depends on a variety of factors, including our monetary policy but also, and even most importantly, the implementation of structural reforms, upholding the credibility of the fiscal framework, and the strengthening of euro area governance.Originally, you had also chosen “inflation differentials in the euro area” as one of the topics of today’s hearing. I hope you will understand that given the important decisions we took in July and September, I have focused my remarks on our monetary policy measures. Nevertheless, I of course stand ready and would be very interested to further discuss the matter of persistent inflation differentials, especially given their link to the structural reform agenda. I am now looking forward to our discussion.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",mr chairman honour member econom monetari affair committe ladi gentlemen hear today take place moment chang ecb novemb ecb becom bank supervisor euro area includ direct supervis larg bank mark biggest step european econom integr sinc incept euro well prepar step also conscious import addit respons take addit cours come month major ecb servic move new ecb premis frankfurt ostend ssm staff remain citi centr also geograph underlin separ ecb new supervisori function task context wish inform publish today decis implement separ ecb monetari polici supervisori function requir ssm regul know novemb eve start singl supervis ampl opportun discuss chair supervisori board result comprehens assess also known background today hear focus attent tradit task ecb particular monetari polici econom recoveri euro area lose momentum follow moder expans recent quarter growth euro area real gdp came halt second quarter year earli inform econom condit receiv summer somewhat weaker expect industri product manufactur order juli gave reason optim recent survey indic given indic sharp declin regist august stop look ahead continu expect euro area domest demand support various factor includ accommod monetari polici stanc favour financ condit structur reform sustain privat consumpt invest time unaccept high unemploy continu weak credit growth like curb strength recoveri risk surround expect expans clear downsid particular heighten geopolit tension could dampen busi consum confid risk insuffici structur reform could weigh busi environ high toward end inflat euro area downward path consider period time august inflat estim reach low revis later expect inflat remain low level come month increas gradual given prolong period low inflat alreadi experienc close monitor risk price develop look forward focus particular possibl repercuss dampen growth dynam geopolit develop exchang rate develop passthrough monetari polici measur turn latest monetari polici decis let stress ecb done lot past three year safeguard price stabil success fought confid crisi euro rais interest rate abnorm level provid euro area bank system unpreced fund continu lower polici rate yet backdrop persist weak inflat outlook slow growth momentum subdu monetari credit dynam decid earli septemb adopt number addit monetari polici initi complet complement measur alreadi announc june first lower key ecb interest rate basi point effect lower bound main refinanc rate stand deposit facil rate second announc measur enhanc function monetari polici transmiss support lend real economi provid monetari accommod given reach lower bound restor function transmiss notabl bank lend instrument ensur monetari polici stimulus introduc reach final borrow therebi support real incom spend price format follow announc ab purchas programm abspp soon start purchas simpl transpar secur under asset consist claim euro area nonfinanci privat sector also start purchas cover bond issu euro area mfis new cover bond purchas programm cbpp measur effect complement strengthen target longerterm refinanc oper tltros whose first allot conduct day ago respect let provid fresh detail outcom first tltro oper last thursday bank particip first tltro amount billion euro within rang takeup valu expect base bank reveal behaviour previous programm decemb bank anoth opportun borrow fund form tltro initi allow entitl borrow cumul amount septemb decemb tender equival outstand stock loan nonfinanci privat sector exclud loan household hous purchas design septemb decemb oper assess combin next year addit quarter allot bank abl receiv addit fund determin recent lend perform yet earli assess impact tltros broader economi announc alreadi notic posit impact financi market sentiment overal expect tltros act power tool strengthen transmiss monetari polici facilit new credit flow real economi given predomin bankbas financ structur euro area economi addit measur took septemb empow credit eas impact tltros three direct first expect purchas simpl transpar ab strengthen direct passthrough effect e extent fund cost relief bank pass along borrow associ tltros measur extent ab market remain sever impair potenti intervent chang market dynam high particular market link spread ab trade secondari market lend rate bank appli primari market credit collateralis secur direct tight second portfolio rebalanc channel expans liquid result combin oper promot diversif invest pattern investor communiti therebi eas financ condit broad third believ overal monetari polici packag underpin forward guidanc determin accomplish expansionari stanc extend horizon keep price stabil mandat desir see inflat stabilis around level close medium term market ab particular suffici ampl allow sizeabl purchas purchas includ fair wide rang simpl transpar ab collateralis loan real economi total stock elig secur current outstand held investor portfolio retain origin bank alreadi sizeabl confid grow result presenc market time purchas contribut normalis trade condit secondari market issuanc activ expand segment current inact experi central bank engag outright purchas structur product demonstr market size purchas volum certain extent codetermin endogen new initi magnifi eurosystem exposur risk outright purchas increas size ecb balanc sheet addit risk exposur limit ab purchas programm purchas senior guarante mezzanin tranch regard senior secur would buy asset elig eurosystem oper ampl experi manag understand risk associ asset class asset purchas would satisfi high standard transpar simplic also characteris low default risk larg degre credit enhanc origin build structur financi transact senior tranch attract high rate make elig programm function protect layer loss guarante mezzanin tranch intrins credit risk would compar guarantor nation supran entiti cover bond share import featur ab therefor obvious complement abscentr programm first link establish issu bank balanc sheet cover bond one side loan back cover bond reason tight price cover bond bid expect bank respond market incent origin saleabl cover secur thus loan collateralis second outright intervent market complement ab purchas reinforc portfolio rebalanc channel transmiss generat posit spillov market secur eas fund credit condit help transmiss monetari polici govern council emphasis combin measur announc june septemb sizeabl impact ecb balanc sheet expect move toward dimens use begin purchas programm start transit monetari polici framework predomin found passiv provis central bank credit activ control manag balanc sheet govern council remain fulli determin counter risk mediumterm outlook inflat therefor stand readi use addit unconvent instrument within mandat alter size composit unconvent intervent becom necessari address risk prolong period low inflat let add howev success measur critic depend number factor outsid realm monetari polici courag structur reform improv competit corpor sector key improv busi environ would foster urgent need invest creat greater demand credit structur reform thus crucial complement ecb accommod monetari polici stanc empow effect transmiss monetari polici indic sever occas monetari also fiscal stimulus ever meaning effect without structur reform crisi full confid return real economi particular capac willing firm take risk invest creat job depend varieti factor includ monetari polici also even import implement structur reform uphold credibl fiscal framework strengthen euro area govern origin also chosen inflat differenti euro area one topic today hear hope understand given import decis took juli septemb focus remark monetari polici measur nevertheless cours stand readi would interest discuss matter persist inflat differenti especi given link structur reform agenda look forward discuss reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en