Jürgen Stark: The Agenda for the Competitiveness of Europe’s Economy and Financial System,05-04-2008,European Central Bank,ECB,3994,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,I wish to thank the organisers of this event [ Ambrosetti] for their invitation, which allows me to speak about the competitiveness of the euro area – a topic which has even become more of a prime concern in many advanced countries in view of the increasing challenges resulting from globalisation. Given the varied facets of “competitiveness” – that I broadly define as “the ability of an economy to compete in international markets” – I would like to start by reviewing some specific aspects of economic and financial performance of the euro area. I would continue thereafter with some aspects regarding the performance of the euro area banking sector, including the link between financial development and the transmission of monetary policy. Finally, with a view to reforms which aim at improving further the performance of the euro area economy and financial system, I will draw some lessons from the recent financial turmoil.Starting by an assessment of the competitiveness of euro area firms and thus their capacity to play a leading role in world markets, losses in world export market shares over the last decade point to increasing challenges for the euro area. While being partly an adjustment to the emergence of new competitors, and most notably China and India, with lower labour costs, this may in principle also reflect losses in price competitiveness against other advanced competitors or a more unfavourable export specialisation. Nevertheless, it is important to note that most other advanced competitors have also experienced export market share losses over the same period. On a more positive note, recent analyses of highly disaggregated data, at the product and variety level, further show that instead European firms have gained market shares in the high-price and high-quality segment of mature sectors. [1]However, important differences remain with regard to the export performance across individual euro area countries. Unfavourable price and cost developments thereby often seem to have been a major cause of a weaker export performance. Contrarily, the relatively stronger export performance of Germany appears, to a large extent, be due to very moderate increases in labour costs. Other factors such as differences in the export specialisation - the product range and product quality - and the geographical orientation certainly have also played a role. For example, due to its higher share of capital goods exports, Germany might have also benefited, to a greater extent, than both Italy and France, from the sustained world demand. Italy and France, by contrast, have a significantly higher export specialisation in consumer goods. In the medium-term, however, it is in particular the lower productivity growth, which weighs on the competitiveness of European firms. Since the mid-1990s, productivity has slowed down substantially in the euro area, leading to a productivity gap with the US. While this gap is closing more recently, improvements in euro area productivity seem to be cyclical and not of a structural nature. At the same time, labour markets in euro area countries have witnessed an increase in participation rate and a decline in the unemployment rate. However, the employment rate still falls behind the objective of 70% set by the Lisbon strategy, and unemployment rates remain unacceptably high in a number of euro area countries. These weaknesses in economic performance point to continued rigidities and imperfections in the euro area economy.To ensure that the advantage of European exporters in specific high value added varieties is not eroded over time, to regain price competitiveness across all euro area countries, and to improve labour market performance and potential output growth, the euro area needs to implement structural reforms directed to boost productivity growth and enhance the functioning of both labour and product markets. This is even more crucial in a monetary union. Since euro area countries can no longer rely on monetary policy and nominal intra-euro area exchange rate adjustment to adjust to adverse shocks and the challenges posed by globalisation, other adjustment mechanisms become even more important. In this context, wage and price flexibility plays a pivotal role. The smooth functioning of the price mechanism is a prerequisite for the efficient allocation of resources across different sectors and over time. In the same vein, the mobility of capital and labour across countries and regions and between different sectors is of particular importance in a monetary union. It is therefore essential that governments establish an institutional framework which allows the economic adjustment processes to function efficiently and effectively. In particular, setting appropriate incentives for economic agents and thus enhanceing the overall growth performance of the economy require further progress in following 5 main policy areas:Policies enforcing competition in product markets and promoting further integration, which will reduce excessive price margins and set incentives for entrepreneurs to become more productive.Improving the business environment, enhancing innovation and increasing the skill level of the workforce play a key role in boosting labour productivity. Increasing the flexibility of labour market, which would ensure that wages are aligned with productivity developments and reflect competitiveness at the sectoral and firm level as well as the regional employment situation.Other measures devoted to human capital accumulation, through improving higher education systems and supporting training and life-long learning, and a higher share and more efficient expenditure in research and development, enhance productivity growth in the long-run and also increase non-price competitiveness. In addition, further efforts are also needed to improve the access to financing, especially as regards small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and the access of start-up firms to venture capital financing. As most recently highlighted in empirical work [2], small successful European firms are apparently less able to grow than comparable US firms due to the poorer access to financing.Over the past decade, progress in these areas has been uneven across euro area countries. Some significant efforts have been made and countries see the benefits from these reforms coming in. However, the reform process needs to continue and the past years of good economic performance are no reason for complacency or even a reversal of past reforms. There is still a long way to go if we want to attain the objective of the Lisbon Strategy to make the European Union “the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world”.Let me now turn to the competitiveness of the euro area financial sector. Financial efficiency has made large progress since the introduction of the euro and has contributed to the competitiveness of the euro area, by accelerating the speed of capital reallocation. Generally, in an efficient financial system, information is accessible and widely distributed. An efficient financial system usually enhances economic growth, whereas, by contrast, information asymmetries or insufficiently developed markets may lead to financing constraints, often especially for SMEs. Therefore, a well-functioning financial system is an EU policy priority as it allows the economy to fully exploit its growth potential, fosters the accumulation of capital and the diversification of risk. Let me start with the size of capital markets, on the basis of which financial development can be assessed, which is an important feature also for the competitiveness of the financial system. The size of euro area capital markets has increased markedly since the introduction of the euro. On average, euro area capital markets, when measuring size including both domestic securities (bonds and stocks) markets and the amount of bank lending to the non-bank private sector, tend to be smaller than the capital markets in the United States and the United Kingdom, but roughly comparable in size to Japanese capital markets. In the euro area, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Ireland have the largest capital markets relative to their economy (GDP). In addition, some euro area countries with smaller financial sectors have experienced strong growth in their capital markets over the past 15 years, for instance Ireland, Portugal and Spain.This development of euro area capital markets is important as financial systems with larger overall capital markets generally allow a faster reallocation of capital and provide easier financing for real investment, thus fostering productivity. Financial development increases the ability of industries to exploit global growth opportunities that may arise from technological innovation, unanticipated demand shocks or price changes. [3] In particular, industries which are structurally highly dependent on external financing, benefit from better financial development in the sense that they are able to grow faster compared with an environment of less developed financial systems. [4] It is also important to note in this context that both securities markets and the amount of loans granted contribute positively to economic growth. The sometimes cited relative share of market versus bank financing therefore appears not to be a key variable for the positive impact of capital markets on economic growth. [5] In addition, with the “originate and distribute” banking model, the borders between bank and market-based financing became blurred to some extent during recent years. With respect to the current turbulences, the relative advantages of traditional bank financing versus market-based financing and the symbiotic relationship between bank and market-based financing may be re-discussed. Generally, traditional relationship banking implies close monitoring and a reduction of information asymmetries, whereas market-based financing (including securitisation) allows a wide (re-)distribution of risk. Some rebalancing of these two key features may be necessary in order to achieve both an appropriate monitoring and sharing of risks. With respect to monetary policy, more developed financial markets, such as developed bond markets or the availability of securitisation, tend to increase competition and the speed of the pass-through of market rates to bank rates in the banking sector for specific bank product segments. [6] Especially in those segments, for which market-based financing is an alternative (for instance for long-term loans to non-financial corporations), an increase in the speed of pass-through seems to have occurred in the euro area during recent years. Overall, the monetary transmission mechanism benefits from integrated and well-developed financial systems in the sense that it leads to a more similar and, in part, faster pass-through of market rates to bank rates. Efforts to strengthen bank competition and enhancing the availability of alternative capital market-based instruments as well as access to financing should therefore be expected to improve the monetary transmission mechanism. At the same time, one has to acknowledge that several studies [7] on the productivity of the EU (euro area) from an industry point of view come to the conclusion that the differences in productivity growth between the US and the EU (euro area) may be partly due to differences in the financial sector. While the productivity performance of the financial intermediation and insurance and pension funds sub-sectors was comparable between the EU and the US, according to some studies the main difference was in the sub-sector “activities auxiliary to financial intermediation”. [8] While productivity measurement is particularly difficult in the services sector, and, hence, also in the financial sector, such differences in productivity growth may be partly related to a higher development and integration of the US financial system, which may facilitate the exploitation of economies of scale. At the same time, with respect to the current situation, it is still too early to assess the longer-term effects of the current turbulences on the gap in productivity growth between the two economic regions. In this context, there is evidence of a considerably positive effect of financial development on EU economic growth. Assuming that the EU would reach the same level of financial development (defined as the sum of domestic credit and stock market capitalisation to GDP) as the US, it is estimated that the overall effect on annual EU value added growth would be between 0.5 and 1.0 percent. [9]Let me now turn to financial integration, which is one important dimension of the efficiency of a financial system. Let me begin by recalling that the ECB and the Eurosystem have a keen interest in the progress towards financial integration in Europe as it is of key importance for the conduct of the single monetary policy, as it enhances the smooth and effective transmission of monetary policy throughout the euro area. In this respect, the Eurosystem strongly supports the initiatives of the European Commission in the field of financial integration. [10] In a fully integrated financial system market players follow a single set of rules and have equal access to the market and are treated equally when operating in the market. In this light, let me mention some key achievements which were reached during the past with respect to financial integration of the euro area.Generally, market segments close to the single monetary policy are very much integrated, especially the unsecured interbank money market. The high integration in the euro area money markets has been supported by the high degree of integration of large-value payment systems. TARGET 2, which was introduced in November 2007, provides now an even more uniform wholesale payment system infrastructure by means of a single technical platform. Besides the technical harmonisation, TARGET 2 also discontinued the differentiation in the fees between intra- and inter-Member State payments and thus, led to a further harmonisation of prices. Last but not least, a reduction of average prices is also expected in TARGET 2.Let me now turn to euro area bond markets. Besides the euro area government bond markets which are increasingly driven by common factors since the introduction of the euro and the removal of the exchange rate risk, also the euro area corporate bond market is quite well integrated. In fact, euro area corporate bond markets seem to be largely driven by common factors, rather than by country-specific ones. In addition, cross-border holdings of debt securities increased markedly over the past ten years, suggesting that investors are increasingly diversifying their portfolios across the euro area. Progress has also been made in the integration of euro area equity markets. [While local shocks to equity markets continue to be important, an increasing share of the total domestic equity volatility can be explained by euro area-wide shocks (“variance ratios”). [11]] As regards cross-border equity investments, it can be noted that euro area residents doubled their holdings of equity issued in other euro area countries between 1997 and 2005 (as a share of their total portfolio of shares issued in their own country and elsewhere in the euro area) to reach around 30%, in particular on account of institutional investors. By contrast, the share of euro area equity assets held outside the euro area remained at a much lower level and increased only slightly.Compared with securities markets, the process of financial integration has advanced more slowly in the banking sector. Against this background, let me discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the euro area banking sector.Let me start the discussion of strengths and weaknesses from a structural point of view, with respect to the integration and efficiency of the banking markets. First, on the positive side, the internationalisation of EU banking groups has increased during recent years. This has resulted, to a large extent, from the overall rise in terms of value in cross-border mergers and acquisitions in the euro area banking sector since 2004. In 2005, the value of cross-border bank M&A deals was particularly high, mainly owing to the acquisition of the Bayerische Hypo- und Vereinsbank by UniCredito Italiano. Generally, cross-border M&A activity is one way to increase competition in the banking sector, which tends to contribute positively to economic growth. While cross-border M&A activity tends to increase competition, extensive public ownership of banks constitutes a possible distortion of competition in the banking sector, which also works against the development of capital markets. In addition, while the integration in the wholesale and capital-market related banking market has advanced well during recent years, the still fragmented retail banking market can be regarded as a further weakness of the euro area banking sector. This can be seen, for instance, in the dispersion of interest rates on loans and deposits from banks to non-financial corporations and households. [12]In addition, in contrast to large-value payment systems (TARGET, TARGET 2), retail payment systems in the euro area are still fragmented. However, the SEPA (Single Euro Payments Area) initiative aims at achieving a fully integrated market for retail payment services in the euro area with no distinction between cross-border and national payments, meaning that in the end all euro payments will be “domestic”. In fact, since the end of January 2008, the first step has become reality with the launch of “SEPA Credit Transfer”, which allows sending euro payments quickly, and in the same way, to any beneficiary in Europe. Overall, the launch of SEPA is a major step in the integration of the euro area retail banking sector. In addition to a structural discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of the euro area banking sector in the light of the performance of the financial system, one may also look at the banking sector in the context of the financial turmoil.Starting from the US sub-prime market, several reasons may lie behind the spill-over of the turmoil to other market segments. A global macroeconomic environment characterised by sustained growth, low inflation, muted long-term interest rates, a long period of very favourable credit conditions, abundant market and funding liquidity, and relatively low official rates may have strengthened investors’ appetite for risk and increased the “hunt for yield”. This, in turn, may have brought about an under-pricing of risk. In addition, the “originate and distribute” banking model, compounded with the proliferation of new and complex financial instruments, notably structured finance products has contributed to a dispersion of credit risk in the financial system and an increased indebtedness of non-financial sectors.In this context, the loosening of credit standards and a probably riskier lending attitude may be identified ex post as a weakness of the banking sector. As banks were able to transfer part of their credit risk, they were able to extend further loans. In addition, there was a widespread underestimation of risks and a lack of transparency in the context of the extensive use of derivative products, partly related to their evaluation by rating agencies, leading to mistrust between market participants, an increase in the cost of funding and liquidity shortages in the course of the turbulences. This underestimation of risks may be seen as another key weakness of the banking sector.Against this background, let me finally discuss the need for potential reforms with respect to preventing and handling financial crises. It seems clear that some very important lessons can be drawn from the turmoil for market players as well as for public authorities. Let me just mention few key areas where reforms are needed. First, with respect to banks, the turmoil has highlighted that some risk categories have been underestimated, especially liquidity risks relating to banks’ commitments to structured investment vehicles and conduits. Second, market players seem to have relied excessively on ratings of complex assets. This has been the case in part due to the wide distribution of risks through the financial sector which made the assessment of the value of the underlying asset difficult for the investor. While, on the positive side, credit risk transfer has facilitated a widespread sharing of risk in the financial system over recent years, the recent financial turmoil made clear that more transparency and monitoring is needed on the credit risks and where they ultimately reside in the financial system. Finally, with respect to public authorities, it seems of high importance that there is a smooth and effective cooperation and exchange of information between supervisory authorities as well as between them and central banks in the detection of threats to the financial system. Particularly, with respect to central banks, it is their own interest to contribute to an orderly functioning of money markets and to solidly anchor inflation expectations in order to avoid additional volatility in already highly volatile financial markets.Let me briefly conclude by summing up what all of this means for the outlook of the euro area. First, from the real economic side, there are encouraging signs indicating the good potential of the euro area to successfully adapt and to remain competitive going forward. Nevertheless, there are important challenges ahead and to implement the necessary structural reforms will be decisive to raise productivity growth and, hence, to foster the competitiveness of euro area firms. Second, with respect to the financial side, the financial development of the euro area has increased markedly since the introduction of the euro. This is particularly important as a well developed financial system allows economies to better allocate resources to industries with good growth opportunities and thus experience faster overall economic growth. In addition, the financial integration of the euro area has made large progress during recent years. This has increased the competitiveness of the euro area. Notwithstanding some reforms, which appear necessary especially following the experience of the recent financial turmoil and further steps which are needed on the way to a fully integrated euro area financial system, the progress already achieved is highly beneficial for the efficiency and competitiveness of the euro area financial system and will ultimately foster the performance of the euro area economy. Aghion, P., Fally, T. and S. Scarpetta (2007), “Credit Constraints as a Barrier to the Entry and Post-Entry Growth of Firms”, IZA Discussion Paper No. 3237.Decressin, J., Faruqee, H., Fonteyne, W., Integrating Europe’s Financial Markets, International Monetary Fund, 2007.European Central Bank, Financial Integration in Europe, March 2007. European Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin, Assessing the performance of financial systems, October 2005.European Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin, The contribution of the ECB and the Eurosystem to European financial integration, May 2006.European Central Bank, Monthly Bulletin, Sectoral patterns of total factor productivity growth in the euro area countries, Box 6, October 2007.European Commission, White Paper on Financial Services Policy 2005-2010, December 2005.Fisman, R., and Love, I., Financial Development and Growth in the short and long run, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 10236, January 2004.Fontagné, L., G. Gaulier and S. Zignago, Specialisation across varieties and North-South competition, Economic Policy, January 2008.Gropp, R., C. Kok Sorensen, J.-D. Lichtenberger, The dynamics of bank spreads and financial structure, ECB Working Paper No. 714, January 2007.Guiso, L., Jappelli, T., Padula, M. and Pagano, M., Financial Market Integration and Economic Growth in the EU, Economic Policy, 2005, 19 (40), pp. 523-577.Hartmann, P., F. Heider, E. Papaioannou and M. Lo Duca, The role of financial markets and innovation in productivity and growth in Europe, ECB Occasional Paper Series No. 72, September 2007.Levine, R., Bank-based or market-based financial systems: which is better?, Journal of Financial Intermediation, 11, 2002, pp. 1-30. Ottaviano, G., D. Taglioni and F. di Mauro, Deeper, wider and more competitive? Monetary integration, Eastern enlargement and competitiveness in the European Union, ECB Working Paper No. 847, December 2007.Philippon, T. and N. Véron, Financing Europe’s fast movers, Bruegel Report, January 2008.Rajan, R. G. and Zingales, L., Financial Dependence and Growth, American Economic Review, June 1998, 88 (3), pp. 559-586.[1] See Fontagné et al. (2008). .[2] See, among others, Philippon and Véron (2008) and Aghion, Fally and Scarpetta (2007).[3] See Fisman and Love (2004).[4] See Rajan and Zingales (1998).[5] See Levine (2002).[6] See Gropp et al. (2007). [7] See several papers and books written by Bart van Ark, Robert Inklaar, Robert McGuckin, Mary O’Mahony, from the University of Groningen, The Conference Board and the National Institute of Economic and Social Research and in particular the report “EU productivity and competitiveness: an industry perspective. Can Europe resume the catching-up process?” office of Official publications of the European Communities, Luxembourg, 2003.[8] According to the OECD, this sub-sector “… includes the provision of services involved in or closely related to financial intermediation, but not themselves involving financial intermediation."". These services include for instance the activities of stock exchanges and brokerage services.[9] See Guiso, Jappelli, Padula and Pagano (2005).[10] In December 2005, the European Commission released its “White Paper on Financial Services Policy 2005-2010”, which shapes the current policy programme in the field of financial services. [11] The indicators report the variance ratios, i.e. the proportion of total domestic equity volatility explained by euro area and US shocks. [12] In particular the dispersion of the interest rates on loans to households for consumption purposes remained relatively high. This is probably the case due to both differences in product availability and statistical issues.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen wish thank organis event ambrosetti invit allow speak competit euro area topic even becom prime concern mani advanc countri view increas challeng result globalis given vari facet competit broad defin abil economi compet intern market would like start review specif aspect econom financi perform euro area would continu thereaft aspect regard perform euro area bank sector includ link financi develop transmiss monetari polici final view reform aim improv perform euro area economi financi system draw lesson recent financi turmoil start assess competit euro area firm thus capac play lead role world market loss world export market share last decad point increas challeng euro area part adjust emerg new competitor notabl china india lower labour cost may principl also reflect loss price competit advanc competitor unfavour export specialis nevertheless import note advanc competitor also experienc export market share loss period posit note recent analys high disaggreg data product varieti level show instead european firm gain market share highpric highqual segment matur sector howev import differ remain regard export perform across individu euro area countri unfavour price cost develop therebi often seem major caus weaker export perform contrarili relat stronger export perform germani appear larg extent due moder increas labour cost factor differ export specialis product rang product qualiti geograph orient certain also play role exampl due higher share capit good export germani might also benefit greater extent itali franc sustain world demand itali franc contrast signific higher export specialis consum good mediumterm howev particular lower product growth weigh competit european firm sinc mid product slow substanti euro area lead product gap us gap close recent improv euro area product seem cyclic structur natur time labour market euro area countri wit increas particip rate declin unemploy rate howev employ rate still fall behind object set lisbon strategi unemploy rate remain unaccept high number euro area countri weak econom perform point continu rigid imperfect euro area economi ensur advantag european export specif high valu ad varieti erod time regain price competit across euro area countri improv labour market perform potenti output growth euro area need implement structur reform direct boost product growth enhanc function labour product market even crucial monetari union sinc euro area countri longer reli monetari polici nomin intraeuro area exchang rate adjust adjust advers shock challeng pose globalis adjust mechan becom even import context wage price flexibl play pivot role smooth function price mechan prerequisit effici alloc resourc across differ sector time vein mobil capit labour across countri region differ sector particular import monetari union therefor essenti govern establish institut framework allow econom adjust process function effici effect particular set appropri incent econom agent thus enhanc overal growth perform economi requir progress follow main polici area polici enforc competit product market promot integr reduc excess price margin set incent entrepreneur becom product improv busi environ enhanc innov increas skill level workforc play key role boost labour product increas flexibl labour market would ensur wage align product develop reflect competit sector firm level well region employ situat measur devot human capit accumul improv higher educ system support train lifelong learn higher share effici expenditur research develop enhanc product growth longrun also increas nonpric competit addit effort also need improv access financ especi regard small mediums enterpris smes access startup firm ventur capit financ recent highlight empir work small success european firm appar less abl grow compar us firm due poorer access financ past decad progress area uneven across euro area countri signific effort made countri see benefit reform come howev reform process need continu past year good econom perform reason complac even revers past reform still long way go want attain object lisbon strategi make european union competit dynam knowledgebas economi world let turn competit euro area financi sector financi effici made larg progress sinc introduct euro contribut competit euro area acceler speed capit realloc general effici financi system inform access wide distribut effici financi system usual enhanc econom growth wherea contrast inform asymmetri insuffici develop market may lead financ constraint often especi smes therefor wellfunct financi system eu polici prioriti allow economi fulli exploit growth potenti foster accumul capit diversif risk let start size capit market basi financi develop assess import featur also competit financi system size euro area capit market increas mark sinc introduct euro averag euro area capit market measur size includ domest secur bond stock market amount bank lend nonbank privat sector tend smaller capit market unit state unit kingdom rough compar size japanes capit market euro area luxembourg netherland ireland largest capit market relat economi gdp addit euro area countri smaller financi sector experienc strong growth capit market past year instanc ireland portug spain develop euro area capit market import financi system larger overal capit market general allow faster realloc capit provid easier financ real invest thus foster product financi develop increas abil industri exploit global growth opportun may aris technolog innov unanticip demand shock price chang particular industri structur high depend extern financ benefit better financi develop sens abl grow faster compar environ less develop financi system also import note context secur market amount loan grant contribut posit econom growth sometim cite relat share market versus bank financ therefor appear key variabl posit impact capit market econom growth addit origin distribut bank model border bank marketbas financ becam blur extent recent year respect current turbul relat advantag tradit bank financ versus marketbas financ symbiot relationship bank marketbas financ may rediscuss general tradit relationship bank impli close monitor reduct inform asymmetri wherea marketbas financ includ securitis allow wide re distribut risk rebalanc two key featur may necessari order achiev appropri monitor share risk respect monetari polici develop financi market develop bond market avail securitis tend increas competit speed passthrough market rate bank rate bank sector specif bank product segment especi segment marketbas financ altern instanc longterm loan nonfinanci corpor increas speed passthrough seem occur euro area recent year overal monetari transmiss mechan benefit integr welldevelop financi system sens lead similar part faster passthrough market rate bank rate effort strengthen bank competit enhanc avail altern capit marketbas instrument well access financ therefor expect improv monetari transmiss mechan time one acknowledg sever studi product eu euro area industri point view come conclus differ product growth us eu euro area may part due differ financi sector product perform financi intermedi insur pension fund subsector compar eu us accord studi main differ subsector activ auxiliari financi intermedi product measur particular difficult servic sector henc also financi sector differ product growth may part relat higher develop integr us financi system may facilit exploit economi scale time respect current situat still earli assess longerterm effect current turbul gap product growth two econom region context evid consider posit effect financi develop eu econom growth assum eu would reach level financi develop defin sum domest credit stock market capitalis gdp us estim overal effect annual eu valu ad growth would percent let turn financi integr one import dimens effici financi system let begin recal ecb eurosystem keen interest progress toward financi integr europ key import conduct singl monetari polici enhanc smooth effect transmiss monetari polici throughout euro area respect eurosystem strong support initi european commiss field financi integr fulli integr financi system market player follow singl set rule equal access market treat equal oper market light let mention key achiev reach past respect financi integr euro area general market segment close singl monetari polici much integr especi unsecur interbank money market high integr euro area money market support high degre integr largevalu payment system target introduc novemb provid even uniform wholesal payment system infrastructur mean singl technic platform besid technic harmonis target also discontinu differenti fee intra intermemb state payment thus led harmonis price last least reduct averag price also expect target let turn euro area bond market besid euro area govern bond market increas driven common factor sinc introduct euro remov exchang rate risk also euro area corpor bond market quit well integr fact euro area corpor bond market seem larg driven common factor rather countryspecif one addit crossbord hold debt secur increas mark past ten year suggest investor increas diversifi portfolio across euro area progress also made integr euro area equiti market local shock equiti market continu import increas share total domest equiti volatil explain euro areawid shock varianc ratio regard crossbord equiti invest note euro area resid doubl hold equiti issu euro area countri share total portfolio share issu countri elsewher euro area reach around particular account institut investor contrast share euro area equiti asset held outsid euro area remain much lower level increas slight compar secur market process financi integr advanc slowli bank sector background let discuss strength weak euro area bank sector let start discuss strength weak structur point view respect integr effici bank market first posit side internationalis eu bank group increas recent year result larg extent overal rise term valu crossbord merger acquisit euro area bank sector sinc valu crossbord bank m deal particular high main owe acquisit bayerisch hypo und vereinsbank unicredito italiano general crossbord m activ one way increas competit bank sector tend contribut posit econom growth crossbord m activ tend increas competit extens public ownership bank constitut possibl distort competit bank sector also work develop capit market addit integr wholesal capitalmarket relat bank market advanc well recent year still fragment retail bank market regard weak euro area bank sector seen instanc dispers interest rate loan deposit bank nonfinanci corpor household addit contrast largevalu payment system target target retail payment system euro area still fragment howev sepa singl euro payment area initi aim achiev fulli integr market retail payment servic euro area distinct crossbord nation payment mean end euro payment domest fact sinc end januari first step becom realiti launch sepa credit transfer allow send euro payment quick way beneficiari europ overal launch sepa major step integr euro area retail bank sector addit structur discuss strength weak euro area bank sector light perform financi system one may also look bank sector context financi turmoil start us subprim market sever reason may lie behind spillov turmoil market segment global macroeconom environ characteris sustain growth low inflat mute longterm interest rate long period favour credit condit abund market fund liquid relat low offici rate may strengthen investor appetit risk increas hunt yield turn may brought underpr risk addit origin distribut bank model compound prolifer new complex financi instrument notabl structur financ product contribut dispers credit risk financi system increas indebted nonfinanci sector context loosen credit standard probabl riskier lend attitud may identifi ex post weak bank sector bank abl transfer part credit risk abl extend loan addit widespread underestim risk lack transpar context extens use deriv product part relat evalu rate agenc lead mistrust market particip increas cost fund liquid shortag cours turbul underestim risk may seen anoth key weak bank sector background let final discuss need potenti reform respect prevent handl financi crise seem clear import lesson drawn turmoil market player well public author let mention key area reform need first respect bank turmoil highlight risk categori underestim especi liquid risk relat bank commit structur invest vehicl conduit second market player seem reli excess rate complex asset case part due wide distribut risk financi sector made assess valu under asset difficult investor posit side credit risk transfer facilit widespread share risk financi system recent year recent financi turmoil made clear transpar monitor need credit risk ultim resid financi system final respect public author seem high import smooth effect cooper exchang inform supervisori author well central bank detect threat financi system particular respect central bank interest contribut order function money market solid anchor inflat expect order avoid addit volatil alreadi high volatil financi market let briefli conclud sum mean outlook euro area first real econom side encourag sign indic good potenti euro area success adapt remain competit go forward nevertheless import challeng ahead implement necessari structur reform decis rais product growth henc foster competit euro area firm second respect financi side financi develop euro area increas mark sinc introduct euro particular import well develop financi system allow economi better alloc resourc industri good growth opportun thus experi faster overal econom growth addit financi integr euro area made larg progress recent year increas competit euro area notwithstand reform appear necessari especi follow experi recent financi turmoil step need way fulli integr euro area financi system progress alreadi achiev high benefici effici competit euro area financi system ultim foster perform euro area economi aghion p falli scarpetta credit constraint barrier entri postentri growth firm iza discuss paper decressin j faruqe h fonteyn w integr europ financi market intern monetari fund european central bank financi integr europ march european central bank month bulletin assess perform financi system octob european central bank month bulletin contribut ecb eurosystem european financi integr may european central bank month bulletin sector pattern total factor product growth euro area countri box octob european commiss white paper financi servic polici decemb fisman r love financi develop growth short long run nation bureau econom research work paper januari fontagné l g gaulier zignago specialis across varieti northsouth competit econom polici januari gropp r c kok sorensen j d lichtenberg dynam bank spread financi structur ecb work paper januari guiso l jappelli padula m pagano m financi market integr econom growth eu econom polici pp hartmann p f heider e papaioannou m lo duca role financi market innov product growth europ ecb occasion paper seri septemb levin r bankbas marketbas financi system better journal financi intermedi pp ottaviano g d taglioni f di mauro deeper wider competit monetari integr eastern enlarg competit european union ecb work paper decemb philippon n véron financ europ fast mover bruegel report januari rajan r g zingal l financi depend growth american econom review june pp see fontagné et al see among other philippon véron aghion falli scarpetta see fisman love see rajan zingal see levin see gropp et al see sever paper book written bart van ark robert inklaar robert mcguckin mari o mahoni univers groningen confer board nation institut econom social research particular report eu product competit industri perspect europ resum catchingup process offic offici public european communiti luxembourg accord oecd subsector includ provis servic involv close relat financi intermedi involv financi intermedi servic includ instanc activ stock exchang brokerag servic see guiso jappelli padula pagano decemb european commiss releas white paper financi servic polici shape current polici programm field financi servic indic report varianc ratio e proport total domest equiti volatil explain euro area us shock particular dispers interest rate loan household consumpt purpos remain relat high probabl case due differ product avail statist issu reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en