Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Private sector involvement: From (good) theory to (bad) practice,06-06-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,2720,"<p>The title of this first session of the conference is: “Policy responses within countries and inside the eurozone since 2010: an appraisal”. The topic is very broad and I cannot cover it in such a short time span unless I am selective and focus on some specific issues. I would like to consider mainly what has not gone as expected and the disappointments. This enables me to avoid talking, once again, about the ECB’s actions over the last 18 months. There are at least three things that have gone wrong. The first is that governments of the countries under stress waited too long before recognising that they needed financial assistance, and submitting their requests for support to the IMF and EU. This is true in all three cases, Greece, Ireland and Portugal. More often than not support programmes are delayed and within well integrated economic and financial regions such as the euro area these delays exacerbate market turmoil and create contagion. There is thus an externality in leaving it entirely to the country in question to turn to the IMF and EU for financial assistance. However, experience has shown that when a country requests such assistance, the national authorities tend to blame European institutions, including the ECB, for having pushed them to do so. “Europe” thus becomes a scapegoat and this may fuel strong – although unjustified – anti-European sentiment in the countries concerned. So governments have a natural inclination not to request financial assistance at an early stage.The second thing that has gone wrong has been the implementation of the Greek programme of reforms. Reform fatigue set in at an early stage and it probably went unnoticed for a while. Member States adopting IMF/EU programmes have to remain firmly committed to very specific measures, which need to be acted upon from the outset. Monitoring has to be strengthened.I will not elaborate on these two first issues but – being here in Berlin today – I would like to focus on the third issue which has not gone well, in my opinion, namely the whole discussion about private sector involvement. The point I would like to make is that having the private sector actively involved in preventing and resolving sovereign crises is a good idea. However, the practical implementation of this idea is fraught with complications and, if done unwisely, may actually be very damaging, and turn out to be more costly for taxpayers. The events of recent months seem to confirm my views.I would define private sector involvement (PSI), for the purpose of this discussion, as intentional efforts and contributions, formal or informal, undertaken in a context of sovereign financial distress. This support ranges from softer forms, such as preventive talks, to harder forms, such as debt rescheduling, restructurings, reprofiling or even debt write-downs. [1] [2] In the remainder of my talk, I will look mainly at the harder forms of PSI, often called debt restructurings.The basic rationale behind involving private creditors when a debtor is in distress is straightforward and uncontroversial: creditors and investors should bear the consequences of their decisions as fully as possible and should not rely on taxpayers’ money to be bailed out. [3] The underlying reason has long existed: a bailout by taxpayers today may encourage risky lending by private investors in the future.In the corporate sector, it is actually commonplace to apply such principles. Under bankruptcy laws or out-of-court settlement guidelines, such as the London Rules, the Jakarta Initiatives or the Hong Kong Guidelines, when a corporate is facing financing difficulties, the responsibility is passed to the debtor and creditors to arrange debt settlements among themselves. Indebted companies can reorganise and restructure their operations to return to profitability. In turn, creditors agree to reschedule loans or accept the conversion of debt into equity.While the basic principles of private creditor participation in resolving the debtor’s dilemma are uncontroversial, the application of these principles to sovereign debt is much more complex. Debt workouts in the corporate and public sectors are quite different. First, assessing the solvency of a country is different from that of a company. The former requires not only an analysis of the cash flow, the balance sheet and the assets and liabilities but also an evaluation of the political will to implement the measures needed to ensure that the country remains solvent. The capacity to service debt requires both a willingness and an ability to implement policies that will generate the necessary resources. To quote the example of Greece: it has a gross debt of around €330 billion and marketable assets worth up to €300 billion, so the country is solvent to the extent that it is willing to sell off some of these assets. The same conclusion would be reached by looking at the measures required to achieve a balanced budget, which largely consist of reversing the decisions taken over the last ten years in respect of public sector wage rises, expenditure increases and the adoption of standard structural reforms which would bring Greece in line with other euro area countries. Just to give an example, if, over the last 10 years, Greek public sector wages had gone up at the same pace as inflation, and public employment had not increased, in 2010 the Greek budget deficit to GDP ratio would have been around 4 percentage points lower and the debt to GDP ratio about 30% lower. [4]The key question is whether the Greek government and the Greek people are willing to implement these measures. The answer to this question largely depends on the alternative scenario, which is a default or restructuring of the public debt. A rational analysis comparing the economic, financial, social and political costs of implementing the needed adjustments, including privatisation, and the costs of a default/restructuring would conclude that the former costs are lower. A rational decision-maker would thus opt for the adjustment and, on that basis, Greece should be considered solvent and should be asked to service its debts. The second difference between debt workouts in the corporate and public sectors is that, unlike a company, a sovereign cannot be liquidated. There are no insolvency laws or bankruptcy forum to address sovereign solvency problems, and IMF attempts to do so during the last decade failed, for several reasons. What is clear is that in the case of an insolvent sovereign, further official finance can only be provided when that sovereign restructures its debts and, at the same time, undertakes serious and credible domestic fiscal adjustment and structural economic reforms. [5]The third feature that generally sets sovereign and corporate debt workouts apart is the externalities they may generate. A debt restructuring of a sovereign may have severe implications, both for the debtor’s and the creditor’s economies.Most of the experience in this area has involved less developed countries. In these cases private sector involvement has largely been a concern for foreign creditors. Taxpayers in creditor countries were affected, depending on the size of the exposure of their respective financial system and on whether the soundness of that system was jeopardised. Measures have been used in the past to try to reduce this impact, in particular through regulatory forbearance. One example is the prudential measures which, during the 1980s, permitted US banks to book Brady bonds at their nominal value. Historical experience has also rejected the Panglossian view that there exists such a thing as an orderly debt restructuring. While some restructurings have indeed been successful and can arguably be said to have occurred in an orderly fashion, they were often on a small scale and executed under specific circumstances. The most striking and oft-quoted case is Uruguay. However, more often than not, restructurings have been disorderly, harmful and fraught with difficulties. The average length of the negotiations is 2½ years [6] and it can vary greatly. In some cases, negotiations have taken just a few months (for instance, Uruguay in 2003, Pakistan in 1999, Chile in 1990 and Romania in 1983); in other cases they have taken many years (for instance, Vietnam from 1982 until 1998, Jordan from 1989 to 1993, Peru from 1983 to 1997 and Argentina more recently). Empirical evidence also shows that private investors are likely to penalise a country which has a history of restructuring and to demand higher risk premia. [7]When considering a euro area economy, the following points should be kept in mind. First, the domestic financial market would be severely affected by a default/restructuring of the public debt. Large losses would have to be accounted for, as no forbearance would be possible, and recapitalisation of the domestic banking system would require additional public money. Second, given the role of the state as implicit guarantor of many financial and economic transactions, the impact on the real wealth of the domestic population and on the economy would be substantial. Third, if the government is still running a primary deficit, it will not have the funds to pay for some of its key functions. Fourth, in the euro area the sovereign does not have a domestic central bank that will finance its deficit. Fifth, after a default/restructuring the banking system of the country would be unlikely to pass the stress test and have sufficient adequate collateral to access the ECB’s refinancing operations. What are the implications of this analysis? Imposing haircuts on private investors can seriously disrupt the financial and real economy of both the debtor and creditor countries. It ultimately damages the taxpayers of both the creditor and debtor country. This is particularly the case in a region like the euro area, consisting of advanced economies with highly integrated financial markets – an integration we have encouraged for years. This is why such restructuring should only be the last resort, i.e. when it is clear that the debtor country cannot repay its debts.Incidentally, this is the way the international community has functioned and cooperated since the Bretton Woods agreement, which set up the IMF. Countries are never encouraged to default or restructure their debts unless they are in a desperate situation and have no alternative. This is why there have been relatively few cases of debt restructuring and defaults, and they have affected poor and often undemocratic countries. Where is the problem? The problem emerges when debt restructuring is carried out not as the last resort but as a preventive tool, even becoming a precondition for receiving (or providing) financial assistance, a point mentioned in some official circles since mid-October 2010. Debt restructuring would be a way to tackle not only dramatic cases of insolvency but also any difficulties countries face in accessing the financial markets. Why is it a problem?First, as I already mentioned, it would not be a way to prevent taxpayers from suffering the consequences of bad investment decisions. In our Monetary Union, given the integration of financial markets and the single monetary policy, the taxpayers of the creditor countries would suffer in any case. According to the Financial Times, for instance, a default on Greece’s debt would cost the German taxpayers alone “at least €40 billion”. [8] Second, this would be a way to punish patient investors, who are sticking to their investment and have not sold their bonds yet, and are confident that with the adjustment programme the country will get back on its feet. Restructuring would instead reward the investors who exited the market earlier or short-sold the sovereign bond, speculating that they would gain out of a restructuring. Third, it would destabilise the euro area financial markets by creating incentives for short-term speculative behaviour. Given that markets are forward-looking, they would try to anticipate any difficulty faced by a sovereign by short-selling their positions, thus triggering the crisis. This would discourage investment in the euro area because of its potential volatility and perverse market dynamics.Finally, such a measure would delay any return to the market by a sovereign, because no market participant would be willing to start reinvesting in the country for a long period if they know that this kind of investment might at some stage be penalised. This would thus discourage private sector involvement and oblige the official sector to increase its financial contribution.A clear example is the fear that private sector involvement would be sought automatically under the European Stability Mechanism. Faced with such circumstances, investors would be sceptical about buying government bonds maturing after 2013. And the statement which is often made in this country that “there will be no restructuring before 2013” does little to reassure investors, as it implies that there might be one afterwards.The proof of what I have just mentioned can be found in the data. Just looking at the yield spreads between the government bonds of the three stressed countries and those of Germany, it can be seen that they were gradually coming down last autumn until the day of the Deauville agreement and then spiked up after the October European Council, in which it was mentioned that preparatory work on the ESM would include “the role of the private sector”. Renewed public comments about a possible “soft restructuring” or “reprofiling” of the Greek debt in April this year produced an immediate spike of the spreads on Greek bonds, with strong contagion effects to other euro area countries (see Chart 1).To sum up, private sector involvement, if pursued imprudently, i.e. automatically rather than as the last resort:does not help save taxpayers’ money; indeed, it may cost them more money;favours short-term speculation over long-term investment, which is certainly undesirable;discourages and even delays any new investments in a country implementing an adjustment programme.Given that such a system – of preventive PSI – does not exist elsewhere in any other parts of the world, the euro area would be seen by investors as handicapping itself and it would feel the effects of discrimination. The euro area, in terms of both sovereign and private investments, would become less attractive. The financial system in particular would be highly exposed to sovereign restructuring. It would also put the euro area at odds with the rest of the international community. Given the damage that such a system would inflict on other investors and countries, the other shareholders may be discouraged from supporting IMF programmes in the euro area. This is how a good idea can turn into bad practice. Continuing to pursue it suggests strong masochistic tendencies. How should the problem be solved? How can we prevent taxpayers of the good performers in the euro area from being asked to foot the bill for the excesses of the bad performers?EMU is based on two pillars. The first is price stability, ensured by an independent central bank. The second is sound public finances, promoted by the Stability and Growth Pact. This second pillar has not worked properly and needs to be repaired. Including some form of automatic private sector involvement does not repair the SGP. It actually weakens it by delegating discipline to the financial markets, which we know are late and pro-cyclical. It makes debt restructuring easier and thus discourages fiscal discipline. The only way to protect taxpayers in “virtuous” countries is to avoid over-indebted countries from easily getting away with not repaying their debts; the payment of debts should be enforced, through sanctions if need be. When countries go off track they can receive financial assistance only in exchange for strict adjustment programmes, including asset sales, which allow these countries to remain solvent. Respect for contracts is the one of the key principles underlying the market economy. It is also the basis of monetary union between sovereign countries. [1]See Enderlein, Müller, and Trebesch, 2006.[2]Soft forms of private sector involvement include those that would not change the terms and conditions of the bonds or loans. Such forms may include voluntary roll-over agreements and preventive talks and meetings. By contrast, harder forms of private sector involvements imply changes to the terms and conditions of the bonds or loans. Under some forms, the private sector participants may face a net present value loss, in other cases they would not face such a loss.[3]See US Treasury Secretary Rubin, 1998.[4]The results of the simulations have to be viewed with caution since they are sensitive to the quality of the underlying data and the assumptions used in the exercise.[5]See, for instance, Roubini, 2002.[6]See Trebesch, 2008.[7]See, for instance, Reinhart et al. 2003 and Ozler, 1993.[8]See FT, 24 April 2011.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",titl first session confer polici respons within countri insid eurozon sinc apprais topic broad cannot cover short time span unless select focus specif issu would like consid main gone expect disappoint enabl avoid talk ecb action last month least three thing gone wrong first govern countri stress wait long recognis need financi assist submit request support imf eu true three case greec ireland portug often support programm delay within well integr econom financi region euro area delay exacerb market turmoil creat contagion thus extern leav entir countri question turn imf eu financi assist howev experi shown countri request assist nation author tend blame european institut includ ecb push europ thus becom scapegoat may fuel strong although unjustifi antieuropean sentiment countri concern govern natur inclin request financi assist earli stage second thing gone wrong implement greek programm reform reform fatigu set earli stage probabl went unnot member state adopt imfeu programm remain firm commit specif measur need act upon outset monitor strengthen elabor two first issu berlin today would like focus third issu gone well opinion name whole discuss privat sector involv point would like make privat sector activ involv prevent resolv sovereign crise good idea howev practic implement idea fraught complic done unwis may actual damag turn cost taxpay event recent month seem confirm view would defin privat sector involv psi purpos discuss intent effort contribut formal inform undertaken context sovereign financi distress support rang softer form prevent talk harder form debt reschedul restructur reprofil even debt writedown remaind talk look main harder form psi often call debt restructur basic rational behind involv privat creditor debtor distress straightforward uncontroversi creditor investor bear consequ decis fulli possibl reli taxpay money bail under reason long exist bailout taxpay today may encourag riski lend privat investor futur corpor sector actual commonplac appli principl bankruptci law outofcourt settlement guidelin london rule jakarta initi hong kong guidelin corpor face financ difficulti respons pass debtor creditor arrang debt settlement among indebt compani reorganis restructur oper return profit turn creditor agre reschedul loan accept convers debt equiti basic principl privat creditor particip resolv debtor dilemma uncontroversi applic principl sovereign debt much complex debt workout corpor public sector quit differ first assess solvenc countri differ compani former requir analysi cash flow balanc sheet asset liabil also evalu polit implement measur need ensur countri remain solvent capac servic debt requir willing abil implement polici generat necessari resourc quot exampl greec gross debt around billion market asset worth billion countri solvent extent will sell asset conclus would reach look measur requir achiev balanc budget larg consist revers decis taken last ten year respect public sector wage rise expenditur increas adopt standard structur reform would bring greec line euro area countri give exampl last year greek public sector wage gone pace inflat public employ increas greek budget deficit gdp ratio would around percentag point lower debt gdp ratio lower key question whether greek govern greek peopl will implement measur answer question larg depend altern scenario default restructur public debt ration analysi compar econom financi social polit cost implement need adjust includ privatis cost defaultrestructur would conclud former cost lower ration decisionmak would thus opt adjust basi greec consid solvent ask servic debt second differ debt workout corpor public sector unlik compani sovereign cannot liquid insolv law bankruptci forum address sovereign solvenc problem imf attempt last decad fail sever reason clear case insolv sovereign offici financ provid sovereign restructur debt time undertak serious credibl domest fiscal adjust structur econom reform third featur general set sovereign corpor debt workout apart extern may generat debt restructur sovereign may sever implic debtor creditor economi experi area involv less develop countri case privat sector involv larg concern foreign creditor taxpay creditor countri affect depend size exposur respect financi system whether sound system jeopardis measur use past tri reduc impact particular regulatori forbear one exampl prudenti measur permit us bank book bradi bond nomin valu histor experi also reject panglossian view exist thing order debt restructur restructur inde success arguabl said occur order fashion often small scale execut specif circumst strike oftquot case uruguay howev often restructur disord harm fraught difficulti averag length negoti ½ year vari great case negoti taken month instanc uruguay pakistan chile romania case taken mani year instanc vietnam jordan peru argentina recent empir evid also show privat investor like penalis countri histori restructur demand higher risk premia consid euro area economi follow point kept mind first domest financi market would sever affect defaultrestructur public debt larg loss would account forbear would possibl recapitalis domest bank system would requir addit public money second given role state implicit guarantor mani financi econom transact impact real wealth domest popul economi would substanti third govern still run primari deficit fund pay key function fourth euro area sovereign domest central bank financ deficit fifth defaultrestructur bank system countri would unlik pass stress test suffici adequ collater access ecb refinanc oper implic analysi impos haircut privat investor serious disrupt financi real economi debtor creditor countri ultim damag taxpay creditor debtor countri particular case region like euro area consist advanc economi high integr financi market integr encourag year restructur last resort e clear debtor countri cannot repay debt incident way intern communiti function cooper sinc bretton wood agreement set imf countri never encourag default restructur debt unless desper situat altern relat case debt restructur default affect poor often undemocrat countri problem problem emerg debt restructur carri last resort prevent tool even becom precondit receiv provid financi assist point mention offici circl sinc midoctob debt restructur would way tackl dramat case insolv also difficulti countri face access financi market problem first alreadi mention would way prevent taxpay suffer consequ bad invest decis monetari union given integr financi market singl monetari polici taxpay creditor countri would suffer case accord financi time instanc default greec debt would cost german taxpay alon least billion second would way punish patient investor stick invest sold bond yet confid adjust programm countri get back feet restructur would instead reward investor exit market earlier shortsold sovereign bond specul would gain restructur third would destabilis euro area financi market creat incent shortterm specul behaviour given market forwardlook would tri anticip difficulti face sovereign shortsel posit thus trigger crisi would discourag invest euro area potenti volatil pervers market dynam final measur would delay return market sovereign market particip would will start reinvest countri long period know kind invest might stage penalis would thus discourag privat sector involv oblig offici sector increas financi contribut clear exampl fear privat sector involv would sought automat european stabil mechan face circumst investor would sceptic buy govern bond matur statement often made countri restructur littl reassur investor impli might one afterward proof mention found data look yield spread govern bond three stress countri germani seen gradual come last autumn day deauvill agreement spike octob european council mention preparatori work esm would includ role privat sector renew public comment possibl soft restructur reprofil greek debt april year produc immedi spike spread greek bond strong contagion effect euro area countri see chart sum privat sector involv pursu imprud e automat rather last resort help save taxpay money inde may cost money favour shortterm specul longterm invest certain undesir discourag even delay new invest countri implement adjust programm given system prevent psi exist elsewher part world euro area would seen investor handicap would feel effect discrimin euro area term sovereign privat invest would becom less attract financi system particular would high expos sovereign restructur would also put euro area odd rest intern communiti given damag system would inflict investor countri sharehold may discourag support imf programm euro area good idea turn bad practic continu pursu suggest strong masochist tendenc problem solv prevent taxpay good perform euro area ask foot bill excess bad perform emu base two pillar first price stabil ensur independ central bank second sound public financ promot stabil growth pact second pillar work proper need repair includ form automat privat sector involv repair sgp actual weaken deleg disciplin financi market know late procycl make debt restructur easier thus discourag fiscal disciplin way protect taxpay virtuous countri avoid overindebt countri easili get away repay debt payment debt enforc sanction need countri go track receiv financi assist exchang strict adjust programm includ asset sale allow countri remain solvent respect contract one key principl under market economi also basi monetari union sovereign countri see enderlein müller trebesch soft form privat sector involv includ would chang term condit bond loan form may includ voluntari rollov agreement prevent talk meet contrast harder form privat sector involv impli chang term condit bond loan form privat sector particip may face net present valu loss case would face loss see us treasuri secretari rubin result simul view caution sinc sensit qualiti under data assumpt use exercis see instanc roubini see trebesch see instanc reinhart et al ozler see ft april reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en