Yves Mersch: Efficient retail payments: key in strengthening the competitiveness and growth potential of the EU,24-03-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,2150,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,It is a great pleasure for me to be here today to contribute to this discussion on retail payments in the euro area and in Europe more broadly. But first of all, I would like to thank the Banca d’Italia for organising this workshop jointly with the ECB, and for hosting it in this beautiful setting. I am also grateful to Fabio Panetta for opening this event in the morning. Payment systems and payment schemes, like this city, don’t get built in a day. Good things take time. Payments are a network industry, and they rely on cooperation between banks and other payment service providers – cooperation that calls for resolve and stamina. Today, I would like to talk about retail payments and the ECB’s and the Eurosystem’s role in those payments, and to touch on current developments and future challenges. I’d also like to say a few words on interchange fees, the issue of this workshop.Payments oil the wheels of the single market. They facilitate the “four freedoms”– the free movement of people, goods, services and capital. Without an efficient electronic payment system, the Union would not have been able to develop and grow over the years. And neither should we forget the contribution made by the large-value and retail payment systems to Europe’s economy at the height of the crisis and in its aftermath. They helped Europe’s economy to run smoothly. Some of you may still remember the times when wages were paid in cash, or the inconvenience of obtaining foreign currencies for trips abroad, the complexities of cross-border payments, not to mention the plans disrupted by unforeseen exchange rate movements. You may even remember how interbank positions were cleared and settled at a physical meeting at the central bank at the end of the business day. Efficient, robust, standardised and integrated retail payments and payment systems are essential to make trade easier, to increase competition and innovation, to foster financial integration and to complete the single currency project. They play a key part in strengthening the competitiveness and growth potential of the European Union. In 2012 the ECB published a study, conducted with 13 EU central banks, on the social and private costs of different retail payment instruments. [1] The study showed that the social costs of retail payment instruments are substantial and amount to €45 billion, i.e. 0.96% of GDP for the participating EU countries [2]. So, in terms of costs, retail payments certainly matter.An ECB study from 2009 shows that in countries with more developed retail payment services banks perform better – both in terms of their accounting ratios and their profit and cost efficiency. [3] Retail payment transaction technology itself can also improve bank performance, and evidence shows that heterogeneity in retail payment instruments is associated with enhanced bank performance. Similarly, a higher usage of electronic retail payment instruments seems to stimulate banking business. There is also evidence showing that retail payment services generate more stable revenues for banks and decrease their risk. So, also in terms of bank performance, retail payments matter.In this context, the discussions on “ring-fencing” retail banking activities are relevant. Retail banking is about taking deposits, offering credit to the real economy and providing payment services to firms and households. These three functions are key public services.To sum up, retail payments are important, and maybe more important than people often think. I am convinced that even greater efficiency in payment systems would further advance the development of the internal market. Let me now turn to the role of the ECB and the respective national central banks.One of the basic tasks of the European System of Central Banks is to promote the smooth operation of payment systems. The integration and harmonisation of retail payment systems within the euro area is therefore of vital concern to us. Progress in this field has only been achieved gradually. It takes time and is sometimes difficult to recognise. However, looking back to when the euro was introduced, we can see that we have made some considerable progress. Back in 2000 most cross-border credit transfers were processed via correspondent banking arrangements, which were based on bilateral relationships between financial institutions. To provide adequate geographical coverage, many bilateral arrangements were needed. It was a system which was considerably less efficient than the fully automated interbank funds transfer systems that were used for national payments in most Member States. These arrangements might also explain the high charges for cross-border payments at that time. The European Commission’s report “Bank charges in Europe” [4], published in April 2000, stated that the average total cost of a cross-border credit transfer was €17.10 for a €100 transfer. Moreover, a cross-border credit transfer took on average nearly 3½ days. Since the introduction of the euro, the ECB and the other Eurosystem central banks have worked in close cooperation with the Commission and the payments industry to establish the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA). The ECB has acted as a catalyst here, providing analytical work and producing progress reports, together with the national central banks, as well as organising conferences and other events to bring market participants together. It has also worked closely with EU legislators, supporting a harmonised legal framework for retail payments. It has resulted in some concrete achievements: Pan-European schemes for basic retail payments, i.e. the SEPA credit transfer and direct debit, were introduced by the payments industry in January 2008 and November 2009 respectively. Costs for cross-border payments are the same as for national payments, and The execution time for a credit transfer does not take more than one banking day (D+1) and the trend is clearly towards same day – or even real-time – settlement of retail payment transactions. The ECB has also been a strong advocate of the SEPA end date regulation and it specified 1 February 2014 as the end date for migration to SEPA credit transfer and direct debit. Despite the Commission’s late amendment allowing banks to process old payment formats until 1 August this year, most Member States succeeded in migrating before the original deadline of 1 February 2014. The most recent migration figures from February 2014 shows that 93.9% of all euro area credit transfers, and 80.3% of all euro area direct debits were processed in SEPA format.As I said earlier, good things take time. That applies to the European Union and to the creation of an integrated market for retail payments. The successful migration to SEPA credit transfer and direct debit does not mark the end of our efforts in retail payments, but lays the foundation for new and innovative payments, and further integration.   I wish to take this opportunity to mention some areas in which we would like to see further integration and harmonisation. First of all, cards. Cards are the alternative to cash at the point of sale. 12 years after the introduction of euro banknotes and coins, we still don’t have an integrated European market for card payments. That is why the Eurosystem is currently preparing a report entitled “Card payments in Europe – a renewed focus on ‘SEPA for cards’”. It will emphasise the need to harmonise principles, business practices and rules, as well as technical standards relating to card payments. We would also like to see payments become faster. Although the D+1 requirement for credit transfers – part of the Payment Services Directive – came into effect in 2012, an increasing number of merchants want to have a payment confirmation before providing the goods or services, and person-to-person payments via mobile phones seem to have great potential. It is becoming clearer by the day that the market wants increasingly faster retail payment execution. Such services are already available in some Member States, but they need to be widely available across Europe.Even if we are focusing on the euro area and the rest of Europe, we should however also aim for integration in a broader context, by bringing forward SEPA standards to a global level as an input for others. SEPA is based on the ISO standard for financial services messaging and on clear business rules. [5] The use of this global standard and these rules for retail payments worldwide would further facilitate the interlinking of payment systems and increase efficiency for all involved. Think about its potential for remittances by migrant workers. Security, unsurprisingly, continues to be a critical topic. Advances in technology mean that the safety and security of retail payments remain of vital interest to market participants and authorities alike. The SecuRe Pay Forum published its recommendations for improving the security of internet payments in January 2013, and it recently published its “public note on security of payment account access services” [6]. The creation of the Euro Retail Payments Board (ERPB) by the ECB’s Governing Council is another step taken by the Eurosystem to foster an integrated, innovative and competitive market for retail payments in euro in the EU. The ERPB will bring together representatives from both the supply and demand sides to identify strategic issues and work priorities, including business practices, requirements and standards, and ensure they are addressed. The Commission will participate as an observer. Similar “social dialogue” bodies have already been set up and are successfully operating in several Member States. The move to establish the ERPB was very well received and its first meeting is scheduled for 16 May. Finally, I would like to say a few words on virtual currency schemes. Bitcoin is perhaps the most notable and topical of these, but certainly no longer the only one. Many media commentators have been wondering what impact these currencies will have on retail payments and even on central banks. I agree that virtual currency schemes are an interesting phenomenon and should not be ignored or dismissed. The ECB was one of the first public authorities to see their potential and their risks and published a detailed analysis in 2012. [7] Despite the overall rise in the value of bitcoin since the publication of the report and the media attention it is getting, our conclusions still seem to be valid, namely, that such currencies are not (at least yet) economically important. In Europe, virtual currencies do not pose a risk to price stability or financial stability, but do pose a risk for users. However, this user risk is more related to speculative investments and consumer protection, and not necessarily to payments. Nevertheless, we are closely following developments and keeping in touch with other authorities. All in all, we are living in a time of rapid change. It may well hold in store some novel and even unconventional challenges as we create the building blocks for further financial integration.Let me conclude by touching on interchange fees, the topic of today’s workshop. The fees have turned out to be a rather controversial issue, not only in Europe but also worldwide. The Eurosystem’s position is neutral on interchange fees. But clarity is needed so that banks and other payment service providers can decide on future investments. That clarity has now been provided in the Commission’s proposal for an interchange fee regulation, which we very much welcome. Even with a cap on interchange fees, banks should seize the opportunities that a “SEPA for cards” offers. The growth potential for cards at the point of sale is still substantial in Europe, especially in some countries. The favourable outlook for card transactions is a business case in itself, even for a scheme that operates with a low interchange fee. Building the European Union is a slow and laborious but ultimately rewarding process. The migration to SEPA credit transfer and direct debit marks the completion of another element in that construction, and there are more to come. I am sure that today’s workshop will give us new insights and help pave the way for further design and construction work, which is of such value to the people of this continent. Finally, a word of thanks to the colleagues of the Banca d’Italia for their warm welcome and hospitality. And, of course, thank you all for attending this workshop today. Unfortunately, I soon have to leave for Frankfurt, so let me wish you “buon appetito” and a fruitful afternoon session.[1]See Schmiedel H., Kostova G. and Ruttenberg W., “The social and private costs of retail payment instruments – A European perspective”, Occasional Paper Series, No 137, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, September 2012. The paper is available at https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpops/ecbocp137.pdf.[2]Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Netherlands, Portugal, Romania, Spain and Sweden.[3]See Hasan I., Schmiedel H. and Liang S., “Return to retail banking and payments”, Working Paper Series, No 1135, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, December 2009. The paper is available at http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp1135.pdf[4]See http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/health_consumer/library/surveys/sur14_en.pdf[5]See “ISO 20022 Financial Services - Universal financial industry message scheme”.[6]See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/pubnote201403securitypaymentaccountaccessservicesen.pdf[7]See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/virtualcurrencyschemes201210en.pdfReproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur today contribut discuss retail payment euro area europ broad first would like thank banca d italia organis workshop joint ecb host beauti set also grate fabio panetta open event morn payment system payment scheme like citi get built day good thing take time payment network industri reli cooper bank payment servic provid cooper call resolv stamina today would like talk retail payment ecb eurosystem role payment touch current develop futur challeng d also like say word interchang fee issu workshop payment oil wheel singl market facilit four freedom free movement peopl good servic capit without effici electron payment system union would abl develop grow year neither forget contribut made largevalu retail payment system europ economi height crisi aftermath help europ economi run smooth may still rememb time wage paid cash inconveni obtain foreign currenc trip abroad complex crossbord payment mention plan disrupt unforeseen exchang rate movement may even rememb interbank posit clear settl physic meet central bank end busi day effici robust standardis integr retail payment payment system essenti make trade easier increas competit innov foster financi integr complet singl currenc project play key part strengthen competit growth potenti european union ecb publish studi conduct eu central bank social privat cost differ retail payment instrument studi show social cost retail payment instrument substanti amount billion e gdp particip eu countri term cost retail payment certain matter ecb studi show countri develop retail payment servic bank perform better term account ratio profit cost effici retail payment transact technolog also improv bank perform evid show heterogen retail payment instrument associ enhanc bank perform similar higher usag electron retail payment instrument seem stimul bank busi also evid show retail payment servic generat stabl revenu bank decreas risk also term bank perform retail payment matter context discuss ringfenc retail bank activ relev retail bank take deposit offer credit real economi provid payment servic firm household three function key public servic sum retail payment import mayb import peopl often think convinc even greater effici payment system would advanc develop intern market let turn role ecb respect nation central bank one basic task european system central bank promot smooth oper payment system integr harmonis retail payment system within euro area therefor vital concern us progress field achiev gradual take time sometim difficult recognis howev look back euro introduc see made consider progress back crossbord credit transfer process via correspond bank arrang base bilater relationship financi institut provid adequ geograph coverag mani bilater arrang need system consider less effici fulli autom interbank fund transfer system use nation payment member state arrang might also explain high charg crossbord payment time european commiss report bank charg europ publish april state averag total cost crossbord credit transfer transfer moreov crossbord credit transfer took averag near ½ day sinc introduct euro ecb eurosystem central bank work close cooper commiss payment industri establish singl euro payment area sepa ecb act catalyst provid analyt work produc progress report togeth nation central bank well organis confer event bring market particip togeth also work close eu legisl support harmonis legal framework retail payment result concret achiev paneuropean scheme basic retail payment e sepa credit transfer direct debit introduc payment industri januari novemb respect cost crossbord payment nation payment execut time credit transfer take one bank day d trend clear toward day even realtim settlement retail payment transact ecb also strong advoc sepa end date regul specifi februari end date migrat sepa credit transfer direct debit despit commiss late amend allow bank process old payment format august year member state succeed migrat origin deadlin februari recent migrat figur februari show euro area credit transfer euro area direct debit process sepa format said earlier good thing take time appli european union creation integr market retail payment success migrat sepa credit transfer direct debit mark end effort retail payment lay foundat new innov payment integr wish take opportun mention area would like see integr harmonis first card card altern cash point sale year introduct euro banknot coin still integr european market card payment eurosystem current prepar report entitl card payment europ renew focus sepa card emphasis need harmonis principl busi practic rule well technic standard relat card payment would also like see payment becom faster although d requir credit transfer part payment servic direct came effect increas number merchant want payment confirm provid good servic persontoperson payment via mobil phone seem great potenti becom clearer day market want increas faster retail payment execut servic alreadi avail member state need wide avail across europ even focus euro area rest europ howev also aim integr broader context bring forward sepa standard global level input other sepa base iso standard financi servic messag clear busi rule use global standard rule retail payment worldwid would facilit interlink payment system increas effici involv think potenti remitt migrant worker secur unsurpris continu critic topic advanc technolog mean safeti secur retail payment remain vital interest market particip author alik secur pay forum publish recommend improv secur internet payment januari recent publish public note secur payment account access servic creation euro retail payment board erpb ecb govern council anoth step taken eurosystem foster integr innov competit market retail payment euro eu erpb bring togeth repres suppli demand side identifi strateg issu work prioriti includ busi practic requir standard ensur address commiss particip observ similar social dialogu bodi alreadi set success oper sever member state move establish erpb well receiv first meet schedul may final would like say word virtual currenc scheme bitcoin perhap notabl topic certain longer one mani media comment wonder impact currenc retail payment even central bank agre virtual currenc scheme interest phenomenon ignor dismiss ecb one first public author see potenti risk publish detail analysi despit overal rise valu bitcoin sinc public report media attent get conclus still seem valid name currenc least yet econom import europ virtual currenc pose risk price stabil financi stabil pose risk user howev user risk relat specul invest consum protect necessarili payment nevertheless close follow develop keep touch author live time rapid chang may well hold store novel even unconvent challeng creat build block financi integr let conclud touch interchang fee topic today workshop fee turn rather controversi issu europ also worldwid eurosystem posit neutral interchang fee clariti need bank payment servic provid decid futur invest clariti provid commiss propos interchang fee regul much welcom even cap interchang fee bank seiz opportun sepa card offer growth potenti card point sale still substanti europ especi countri favour outlook card transact busi case even scheme oper low interchang fee build european union slow labori ultim reward process migrat sepa credit transfer direct debit mark complet anoth element construct come sure today workshop give us new insight help pave way design construct work valu peopl contin final word thank colleagu banca d italia warm welcom hospit cours thank attend workshop today unfortun soon leav frankfurt let wish buon appetito fruit afternoon session see schmiedel h kostova g ruttenberg w social privat cost retail payment instrument european perspect occasion paper seri ecb frankfurt main septemb paper avail https www ecb europa eupubpdfscpopsecbocp pdf denmark estonia finland greec hungari ireland itali latvia netherland portug romania spain sweden see hasan schmiedel h liang return retail bank payment work paper seri ecb frankfurt main decemb paper avail http www ecb europa eupubpdfscpwpsecbwp pdf see http ec europa eudgshealth_consumerlibrarysurveyssur _en pdf see iso financi servic univers financi industri messag scheme see http www ecb europa eupubpdfotherpubnot securitypaymentaccountaccessservicesen pdf see http www ecb europa eupubpdfothervirtualcurrencyschem en pdfreproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en