Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: With or Without Prejudice to Price Stability?,24-05-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,5747,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen, It is an honour and a great pleasure for me to address you this evening. I would like to take this opportunity to discuss one of the issues that has puzzled me and, at times, concerned me the most during my two years on the ECB’s Executive Board. It is the issue of the so-called “secondary objective” of monetary policy.As you well know, the Treaty establishing the European Community states that, “ without prejudice” to the overriding objective of price stability, the ECB shall support the general objectives of the Community. These objectives are spelled out in Article 2 of the Treaty, namely: “… a harmonious, balanced and sustainable development of economic activities, a high level of employment and of social protection, … sustainable and non-inflationary growth, … and economic and social cohesion …”. And these objectives are all put at the same level, i.e. there is no specific hierarchy. However, when it comes to the part concerning monetary policy and the Statute of the European System of Central Banks, the Treaty clearly states that the primary objective of monetary policy is price stability, and that the other objectives, such as sustainable growth and employment, should only be supported “without prejudice” to price stability. This wording used in the Treaty seems to imply that there are two different ways through which monetary policy can support sustainable growth and employment: one that is without prejudice to price stability and the other that, instead, may constitute a prejudice to the primary objective. This therefore raises the question: what contribution can monetary policy make to the harmonious, balanced and sustainable development of economic activities that does not prejudice price stability? This is not a new question. Even before I came to the ECB, at my hearing before the European Parliament, I was asked: “ Without prejudice to the objective of price stability, how in your view should the ECB fulfil its secondary obligation under the Treaty (to contribute to economic growth and full employment) and what instruments could the ECB use to do so?”. Interestingly the same question has been put to all past and subsequent candidates. Perhaps one day somebody will finally give the “right” answer!But, joking aside, why is this issue so puzzling? Well, maybe it is because the answers provided by central bankers and most academics expert in monetary and financial economics are quite different from those of commentators and politicians. Bankers and economists, for example, would say that the best contribution that monetary policy can make to sustainable growth is to promote price stability; whereas certain politicians and commentators argue at times that central banks, including the ECB tend to focus too heavily on inflation, to the neglect of growth and employment. How can we rationalise and explain the reasons for such different views? How can we hope to lay the ground for a common understanding? Personally I am tempted to adopt a quite provocative line of reasoning and ask: well, what would happen if we set, as the primary objective of monetary policy, the achievement of “harmonious, balanced and sustainable growth” rather than price stability? Would monetary policy be substantially different from the one of a central bank pursuing price stability as its primary objective, as is the case of the ECB? Would it all make a difference?The answer depends on the underlying model of the economy that one has in mind. I will contend that those who think that monetary policy has a choice between output stability and price stability base their view on a very specific assumption about the way the economy functions, and in particular about how agents form their expectations. Once these assumptions are relaxed, and a more realistic view of the world is adopted, it can be demonstrated that monetary policy has no choice, if it wants to support growth, but to consistently promote price stability over the medium term in a credible fashion.I would like to structure my remarks as follows. I will start from a simple mainstream New Keynesian model of the economy, and then consider more complicated, but more realistic, models. Based on this analysis, I will then explain what the general consensus is among central bankers virtually worldwide, independently of what their central bank statutes formally state, and provide some relevant empirical evidence on the issue. Finally, I would like to discuss briefly some of the risks involved in an environment of price stability, mainly in terms of the complacency of both policy-makers and market participants. And then I will conclude.Let me start from a simple theoretical model. In the standard New Keynesian framework, with rational expectations and full information by the central bank, the existence of a trade-off between output stability and price stability depends on the nature of the shocks hitting the economy. Demand shocks do not pose any dilemma for monetary policy, since the interest rate reaction aimed at stabilising inflation is consistent with that aimed at stabilising output. By contrast, cost push shocks (i.e. shocks driving up inflation, independently of demand conditions) are a dilemma for monetary policy, since the interest rate reaction to stabilise inflation is of an opposite direction to that required to stabilise output. For these shocks, the central bank must make a choice between stabilising inflation or output, or a combination of both. [1] In this analytical framework, the way in which the central bank reacts to a cost push shock entails a choice between two competing objectives: the stabilisation of inflation variability or the stabilisation of output variability. Indeed, a central bank aiming primarily at stabilising output would have to compromise on inflation stability and vice versa. It would thus make a difference, in terms of price stability or output stability, whether the central bank had as its primary objective the former or the latter. This explains the interest of observers, market participants and politicians in trying to understand and, in some cases, also to influence, central bank preferences. The key assumptions of this model is that the central bank has full knowledge of the structure of the economy and of the shocks affecting it and that agents are fully rational and know perfectly the objectives and preferences of the central bank. In this full-information and fully-rational context, there is a well-defined and stable trade-off between output and inflation variability (known as the Phillips curve). The central bank has to choose a point along an efficiency frontier and ensure that its behaviour is consistent with, and therefore validates agents’ expectations in a repeated game context. Based on this analytical framework, the literature has developed normative prescriptions on the optimal behaviour of the central bank, which can be described according to an optimal policy rule, conditional on the structure of the economy and the shocks hitting it.This type of model is certainly useful, largely because of its simplicity and thus its ability to derive simple policy rules for the central bank. However, the gap between model and reality may be a bit too wide. Let me emphasise one key assumption that underpins the model, which might be (a bit) unrealistic: in these models, central banks are considered as some sort of gods, in which all economic agents fully believe, just like religious fanatics. In such a world, the issue of central bank credibility does not arise, by definition, because the central bank has full knowledge of the economy and always behaves optimally, hitting whatever target it is given. There is only one Phillips curve, along which different equilibria are determined. The central bank has just to decide the point along the curve that it decides to target and then achieve it.However, although being likened to gods may be flattering for central banks, it is unfortunately somewhat exaggerated and removed from reality. Economic agents, especially market participants, certainly do not believe unconditionally in central banks and tend to behave rather like St Thomas: see first, then believe. Thus, central bank credibility cannot be taken for granted: it is continuously tested, and rightly so, by the markets. This suggests that some of the assumptions underlying the theoretical models used to analyse monetary policy might be too simplistic. Substantial research has been carried out in recent years to model inflation expectations in a more realistic way. Models of learning, imperfect knowledge and bounded rationality are becoming increasingly widespread in monetary economics. [2] In short, these models are based on a “signal extraction” problem, whereby economic agents learn, albeit slowly and in an imperfect manner, the underlying (and possibly time-varying) central bank preferences, including the inflation target. They do this by observing the behaviour of the target over time, when there is one, and by looking at the resulting inflation performance. And inflation expectations tend to be particularly sensitive to sustained deviations between observed inflation and its (announced or perceived) target.In such models, when the economy is hit by a shock that temporarily increases inflation, agents consider that the objective of the central bank might have changed, and possibly increased above previous expectations. Divergences between inflation expectations and the inflation target affect the persistency of inflationary pressures following an exogenous shock, thereby making it more costly (in terms of lost output) for the central bank to bring inflation back to the target. [3] In these models, there is no single trade-off between output and inflation variability, but a multiplicity of trade-offs, depending on the way inflation expectations are formed. If inflation expectations rise, for whatever reason, the efficiency frontier between output and inflation stabilisation is shifted outwards, raising both output and inflation variability. The higher the level of inflation expectations is, the higher the level of output variability is for any given level of inflation, and vice versa. That is why it is so important for inflation expectations to remain as close as possible to the target, especially after an exogenous shock. It is a way to keep the inflation-output trade-off as favourable as possible and thus minimise  both output and inflation variability.In more sophisticated models, the anchoring of inflationary expectations to their target is essential, not only in the face of cost push shocks, as previously examined, but also in the face of demand shocks. Given that there are lags between the impact of demand shocks on output and the impact on prices – the former generally being quicker than the latter – the dynamics of inflation might differ substantially from those of output growth, especially at turning points in the cycle. This poses a challenge to monetary policy in the presence of less-than-perfect foresight/rational expectations.For instance, as the economy reaches a cyclical peak, the slowdown in economic activity would normally tend to precede the adjustment in price dynamics, as inflationary pressures might continue for some time, especially in the presence of labour and product market rigidities. In the ideal world of perfect anchoring of inflation expectations and full central bank credibility that I considered initially, there would be no problem for monetary policy: inflation expectations are always aligned to the target, and observed inflation adjusts rapidly to the cyclical conditions. Under such circumstances, monetary policy can follow quite closely the cyclical pattern in output and easing takes place as soon as the economy slows down, thus supporting economic activity. There is no contradiction between the two objectives.If, instead, inflationary expectations are not fully aligned with the target, the central bank may well face a dilemma. As the economy slows down, the central bank might decide to reduce interest rates, ignoring inflationary pressures and expectations. However, this might create the suspicion by economic agents that the central bank has changed its inflation target. The divergence between inflation expectations and the target might further increase, adding to inflation persistence and volatility. To bring inflation down, the central bank will ultimately have to maintain a tight stance for a longer period of time, despite the economic slowdown, and this will add to output volatility. If inflation expectations are allowed to be disanchored, monetary policy will turn out to be much more restrictive than would be the case with anchored expectations; inflation volatility will come at the price of greater output volatility. The more inflation expectations are aligned with the target, the quicker monetary policy can be adjusted to the underlying economic conditions. This is why central banks communicate publicly that their primary focus is price stability, even as the economy slows down, so that they can anchor expectations and therefore align as quickly as possible their interest rate policy with the underlying macroeconomic conditions. To sum up, in a world in which credibility is not taken for granted, i.e. central banks are not infallible, the trade-off between price stability and output stability is greatly diminished, both under cost and demand shocks. For monetary policy to support growth, it has to ensure price stability in a credible way.Central banks in the industrial world follow an approach that derives from the more realistic models I have just described. They do not consider themselves to be infallible, but rather see their ability to anchor expectations as a key asset; one that takes a long time to build up, but also one that can be lost very quickly. Under such conditions, maintaining price stability is necessary to foster sustainable development. Let me give you three recent quotes by three different Central Banks. I leave it up to you to guess where they come from (but they are not from the ECB!): “By keeping inflation on track to meet the 2% target in the medium term, thus ensuring price stability, the Bank is providing a platform of macroeconomic stability which is the best contribution monetary policy can make to the objectives of high and stable levels of economic growth and employment.” [4]“Experience shows that low and stable inflation and inflation expectations are also associated with greater short-term stability in output and employment, perhaps in part because they give the central bank greater latitude to counter transitory disturbances to the economy. […] In sum, achieving price stability is not only important in itself; it is also central to attaining the other mandated objectives of maximum sustainable employment and moderate long-term interest rates.” [5] “Price stability is an indispensable prerequisite for realizing sustainable growth, and the Bank is responsible for realizing price stability through an appropriate conduct of monetary policy.” [6]What is interesting about these three quotes is that they reflect a common view, independently of the institutional framework in which the three Central Banks operate and also of the underlying stage of the cycle in the various countries. This was also reflected in the most recent G7 communiqué of 13 April 2007, which stated that: “ We [the finance ministers and central bank governors of the G7] continue to be committed to maintaining price stability as the best contribution that monetary policy can make to sustained global growth”. So there is a striking degree of consensus in policy-making circles that price stability and output stability are two sides of the same coin, and that there is no exploitable trade-off between these two objectives, at least not over the medium term. There is a substantial amount of evidence confirming the result derived from the more realistic models, which indicates that the more inflation expectations are anchored, the more monetary policy can be supportive of economic activity. Economic history has shown that inflation was more persistent during the period of Great Inflation in the 1970s and much less persistent during the period of stable prices. According to some studies, inflation appears to have been less persistent in Germany (a country where the Great Inflation was much less severe) than in other industrial countries, although there is some debate surrounding this. [7] Moreover, although there are many explanations of the Great Moderation, i.e. the radical reduction in output growth volatility experienced in the last two decades, [8] it is generally accepted that the Great Disinflation was accompanied by a marked decline of output volatility, not only in the United States, but also on a global scale (Japan being an exception).There is, on the other hand, no evidence that lower real GDP growth volatility has been obtained at the expense of somewhat higher inflation volatility; in fact, if anything, the opposite seems to be true, also if we look across countries. [9] In addition, there is significant empirical support for the proposition that inflation negatively affects long-term growth, even at relatively low levels of inflation. [10] Finally, there is also some evidence that banking crises are more frequent in countries with high and variable inflation. [11]Furthermore, we might have to reconsider the view that the high macroeconomic stability in the United States in the period following the mid-1980s might be attributed to increased monetary policy activism, known as “the resurrection of fine-tuning” [12]. There is recent evidence that the so-called period of Great Moderation is a global phenomenon which occurred at the same time as the Great Disinflation and the beginning of the period of stable prices, although there is not necessarily a direct causal link between the two. The reduction in output growth volatility after the mid-eighties (the end of the Great Inflation) was, in fact, not limited to the United States. Moreover, the evidence that output growth volatility actually picked up at the onset of the Great Inflation reinforces this point. [13] Long and short-term interest rates the world over have also become significantly less variable and lower in real terms. [14] The evidence would seem to confirm that it is the focus on price stability and the anchoring of inflation expectations which have contributed to reducing output volatility, rather than increased activism on the part of the Federal Reserve. In any case, recent research shows that differences in the institutional structure, the mandate or even the environment do not lead central banks to behave differently in their attempts to combat inflation. [15] A recent study, for instance, compared the behaviour of the ECB and the Federal Reserve against the background of a similar structural model, estimated respectively on euro area and US data. The results show that, had the ECB followed the same estimated monetary policy rule as the Fed and applied it to the euro area economy, its contribution to economic growth in the period 2001-06 would not have been greater; actually the opposite holds true. [16] Another paper, using a different estimated model for the euro area and the United States, found that differences in the type, size and persistence of shocks explain the different interest rates between the two areas, rather than differences in the monetary policy reaction function. [17] This would suggest that comparisons between different interest rate levels at different times in different countries do not necessarily lead to concluding that a central bank assigns a greater weight to supporting economic activity than another. Looking at the most recent period, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that short-term interest rates in the euro area are currently significantly lower than in the United States, by over 100 basis points, despite GDP growth being stronger on this side of the Atlantic, for over a year now. This might be partly linked to the fact that inflation expectations have been systematically lower and more stable in the euro area. The same holds true in a comparison with the United Kingdom. We need to understand why inflation expectations have remained relatively low and stable in the euro area, and market participants are among the best placed to answer this question. I would contend that the reason is that the ECB has acquired over the years substantial credibility as an inflation fighter. This is the main reason why interest rates are relatively low in the euro area. This confirms that promoting price stability is fully consistent with, and actually the best way to promote, sustainable growth. To sum up, evidence suggests that central banks aim to stabilise output growth primarily by stabilising prices and anchoring inflation expectations. This is consistent with the models examined previously, which show that achieving price stability is instrumental in sustaining economic growth.In the introduction I provocatively asked the question of whether monetary policy would differ if growth, rather than price stability, were the primary objective of a central bank. The arguments presented so far would suggest a negative answer. Since price stability is a way to achieve the ultimate objective of stable and sustainable growth, why do central bank statutes mention price stability as their main goal, rather than growth? Well, there are several reasons – one is accountability: growth depends on many things, price stability being one of them, and monetary policy should be held accountable only for what it can deliver over a certain period of time. Consider the following: the ultimate objective of a good diet is to be healthier and to live longer. However, any diet sets clear and unambiguous goals, in terms of a number of kilos or pounds that can be easily monitored. Another reason is very much linked to the features of the economic model previously described, and the importance of anchoring agents’ expectations. We know very little about how inflation expectations are formed. [18] Expectation phenomena are likely to be abrupt and non-linear, as studied for example in the finance literature. [19] They may be triggered by apparently irrelevant events. [20] Moreover, once expectations go off mark, it may be hard to bring them back under control. Nor can we assume that inflation expectations of households and firms are the same as those of financial market participants, which sometimes receive more attention. It has been shown in the literature that, in the presence of learning and bounded rationality, the optimal weight of inflation in the reaction function of the central bank must be higher. [21] This is one of the reasons why it is important to have a clear quantitative definition of price stability. [22] In this context, an institutional framework safeguarding central bank independence and a clear indication of a quantitative definition of price stability, to which the monetary authority may be held accountable, are very helpful. Ultimately, however, there is no substitute for a track record of being able and determined to maintain price stability; in fact, there is evidence that long-term inflation expectations have traditionally been lagging, rather than leading, indicators of actual inflation. [23] All in all, if fostering sustainable growth is what matters, it pays off for society as a whole to have central bankers who are a bit obsessed about inflation!I am nearing the end of my address, but I would just like to mention very briefly one risk that may arise in an environment of apparently solidly entrenched price stability, which is what we currently witness in most industrial and also developing countries. The risk I am referring to is complacency: complacency by both the central banks and the private sector, primarily market participants. For monetary authorities the risk is to forget that keeping well-anchored inflation expectations and low inflation persistence requires, above all, a forward-looking and decisive reaction to inflationary pressures. [24] The central bank may occasionally have a hard time in convincing market participants and public opinion that monetary policy action is required, at times, to keep inflationary pressure under control.For market participants, the risk is that inflation expectations, for example those embedded in bond yields, progressively lose information and are not adequate to price, and protect against, possible risks. The absence of an adequate assessment of, and possibly insurance against, sudden shifts in inflation expectations could in turn aggravate the actual turmoil created by these phenomena, which are notoriously unpredictable. Thus, central banks have to move along a fine line between being credible and avoiding instilling too much complacency in market participants.From a longer-term perspective, we should not forget that the remarkable macroeconomic stability that we have witnessed in the past two decades has been rather exceptional. History is replete with periods of apparently unshakeable stability and prosperity being suddenly broken by instability and depression. For example, and with due regard to the different proportions, the instability following the First World War was preceded by a period of stability and progress during the belle époque which at the time seemed almost “natural” and ever lasting. The same can be said for the two decades after the Second World War, which were followed by 15 years of economic and financial instability. We have learnt from these episodes to develop institutions, most notably independent central banks, with the task of safeguarding price stability. These institutions can, however, adequately perform their functions in the long run if they have the continuous support and attention by market participants and the public at large. We also know that circumstances can become more adverse than they have been over the recent past. To sum up, the risk is that we all forget that inflation, even when dormant, is itself always a risk. Even at the cost of sounding boring – and this is ultimately our goal - it is the task of central banks to remind society of this risk, and to act to counteract such a risk. This creates a catch 22. Central banks must mention and explain the inflationary risks underlying the economy that might justify their policy actions, but they must also reassure markets and agents that their actions will counteract such risks so that, ultimately, price stability is ensured. The two messages are not necessarily easy to get through. A typical example of this difficulty is the question that is often put to central banks: why are you talking about inflation risks if inflation is low? Why are you raising rates, if there is price stability? The answer, which is not always fully understood, is that inflation is low because central banks act to ensure price stability, and they act based on their projection of underlying inflationary pressures. As history and analysis have shown, preventing central banks from playing such a role, of warning and acting to prevent inflation, does not produce more growth. The main risk of central banks is to become themselves victim of the so-called Goodhart law, which says that if you target successfully a variable with a given instrument, the observed statistical correlation between that instrument and the targeted variable tends to vanish. If the central bank’s interest rate policy is successful in ensuring price stability, there will be over time little or no observable correlation between interest rates and inflation. This certainly makes central banks' task of explaining their policy a bit challenging, and certainly not boring! To conclude, let me just reiterate what I would call a “central bank consensus”. A strong focus on price stability is the best contribution monetary policy can make towards sustainable growth. Being focused on inflation over the medium term, rather than on a combination of inflation and output stability, helps to anchor inflation expectations and keep inflation persistence low and thus to foster output growth. Therefore, a central bank focused on price stability does exactly what a central bank aimed at promoting sustainable growth would do.I know that this consensus is widely shared by a large part of the academic world and certainly by financial market participants, who are those that ultimately assess the credibility of central banks. However, we have to recognise that this consensus is not yet fully shared by all, and still questioned in particular by some observers, commentators, politicians, sometimes social partners. Why is it the case?The answer that I tried to give is that many of these outside observers are influenced by economic models that are based on very restrictive assumptions, which might not be entirely realistic, especially concerning the way in which interest rates are determined in financial markets. One of these assumptions is that central banks have full knowledge of the economy and are not only infallible but also believed by market participants to be infallible. This raises a series of paradoxes. The first is that these models, and their underlying hypothesis of infallible central banks, are often used in the intention to put into doubt central banks infallibility and to criticize them for being stubborn inflation fighters, instead of growth promoters. A second paradox is that if central banks followed what these critics suggest, and aimed at the wrong target, for sure market participants will start doubting their infallibility. If this happens, the central bank would be incapable of exploiting any trade-off and would end with higher inflation and higher output variability. The third paradox is that when central banks’ credibility is put into question, maybe because of the criticisms of those that would want a more expansionary policy, the only way for central banks to regain credibility, in order to support growth, is to focus even more on fighting inflation. That is why central banks’ statutes mention price stability above all other objectives. And that is why central bankers are paid not only to worry about inflation risks, but also to make sure that these risks do not materialise, in particular by acting in a “firm and timely” fashion. Thank you very much for your attention.Adam, K., Marcet, A. and J.P. Nicolini, “Stock market volatility and learning”, presented at the conference on Monetary policy, asset markets and learning, 6 – 7 November 2006, European Central Bank.Bini Smaghi, L. (2007): “Globalization and monetary policy”, Journal of Policy Modeling, forthcoming.Blanchard, O. and J. Simon (2001): “The long and large decline in U.S. output volatility”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp. 589-610.Blinder, A. S. and R. Reis (2005): “Understanding the Greenspan Standard”, CEPS Working Paper No. 114.Cecchetti, S, Hooper, P., Kasman, B. C., Schoenholtz, K. L. and M. W. Watson (2007): “Understanding the evolving inflation process”, paper presented at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum 2007.Cecchetti, S., Flores-Lagunes, A. and S. Krause (2006): “Assessing the sources of change in the volatility of real GDP growth”, NBER Working Paper n. 11946.Christiano, L., R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2007): “Shocks, Structures or Policies? The euro area and the US after 2001”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, forthcoming.Demirguc-Kunt, A. and E. Detragiache (2005): “Cross-Country Empirical Studies of Systemic Bank Distress: A Survey”, IMF Working Paper n. 05/96.Deutsche Bank (2007): “Comparing G3 central banks”, Global Economic Perspectives, 21 May.Elger, T., B. E. Jones and B. Nilsson (2006): “Forecasting with monetary aggregates: recent evidence for the United States”, Journal of Economics and Business, 58, pp. 428-446.Erceg, C. and A. Levin (2003): ''Imperfect Credibility and Inflation Persistence'', Journal of Monetary Economics , vol. 50 (2003), pp. 915-944.Evans, G. W. and S. Honkapohja (2001): Learning and Expectations in Macroeconomics, Princeton: Princeton University Press.Gadzinski, F. and F. Orlandi (2004): “Inflation persistence in the European Union, the euro area, and the United States”, ECB Working Paper n. 414.Gerdesmeier, D., F. P. Mongelli and B. Roffia (2007): “The Eurosystem, the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan: similarities and differences”, ECB Working Paper n. 704Gürkayanak, R. S., Levin, A. T. and E. T. Swanson (2006): “Does inflation targeting anchor long-run inflation expectations? Evidence from long-term bond yields in the U.S., U.K. and Sweden”, working paper.Judson, R. and A. Orphanides (1999): “Inflation, volatility and growth”, International Finance, 2, 1, pp. 117-138.Khan, M. S. and A. S. Senhadji (2000): “Threshold effects in the relationship between inflation and growth”, IMF Working Paper n 00/110.Kohn, D. L. (2007): “Inflation Modeling: A Policymaker’s Perspective”, remarks at the Quantitative Evidence on Price Determination Conference, Washington, D.C., September 29, 2005 Leduc, S., Sill, K. and T. Stark (2002): ""Self-fulfilling expectations and the inflation of the 1970s: evidence from the Livingston Survey,"" Working Papers 02-13, Federal Reserve Bank of PhiladelphiaMishkin, F. (2007a): “Monetary policy and the dual mandate”, speech at Bridgewater College, Virginia, 10 April.Mishkin, F. (2007b): “Inflation dynamics”, remarks at the Annual Macro Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 23 March.Morris, S. and H.-S. Shin (1998), “Unique equilibrium in a model of self-fulfilling currency attacks,” American Economic Review 88, 587-97.Orphanides, A. and J. C. Williams (2005): “The decline of activist stabilization policy: natural rate misperceptions, learning, and expectations”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 29, 11, pp. 1927-1950.Sahuc, J.-G. and F. Smets (2007): “Differences in interest rate policy at the ECB and the Fed: An investigation with a medium-scale DSGE model”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, forthcoming.Woodford, M. (2003): Interest and prices: foundations of a theory of monetary policy, Princeton: Princeton University Press.[1] See Woodford (2003). [2] See Evans and Honkapohja (2001).[3]  This is supported by empirical evidence. For example, Leduc, Sill and Stark (2002) showed that during the pre-1979 era temporary shocks to expected inflation led to a permanent increase in actual inflation, due to passive monetary policy, which did not occur post-1979, due to more active monetary policy. [4]  Letter by Mervyn King to the UK Government, 16 April 2007.[5]  Bernanke, B. (2006), ""Semi-annual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress"", 15 February 2006. See also Mishkin (2007a) for very similar views.[6]  Press Release by the Bank of Japan of 9 March 2006 entitled “ The Introduction of a New Framework for the Conduct of Monetary Policy”.[7]  Gadzinski and Orlandi (2004).[8]  See, for example, Cecchetti, Flores-Lagunes and Krause (2006).[9] See Blanchard and Simon (2001). [10] Khan and Senhadji (2000) analyse data for 140 countries over the period 1960 to 1998. They find that the threshold level of inflation above which there is a positive association between the level of inflation and economic growth is between 1% and 3% for industrial countries. Judson and Orphanides (1999) find evidence that inflation volatility contributes significantly to lower economic growth in a large number of countries.[11] See Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (2005). [12] See Blinder and Reis (2005).[13] Elger, Jones and Nilsson (2006) use regime-switching VAR models with two states to forecast US inflation and real output growth. In their estimated models, one of the two states is associated with more volatile macroeconomic shocks than the other. They find that there is a clear separation between the two states over time: the low volatility state prevails throughout the 1960s; the high volatility state dominates from the 1970s through the mid-1980s; and the low volatility state prevails again from then until the end of their sample in 2004 coinciding with the Great Moderation. [14] See Bini Smaghi (2007).[15] See Gerdesmeier, Mongelli and Roffia (2007). For a market analysis, see Deutsche Bank (2007), pointing to the fact that the Federal Reserve practices a stricter inflation targeting than the ECB or the Bank of Japan, despite the dual mandate.[16] Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2007).[17] See Sahuc and Smets (2007).[18] See Kohn (2007) for more elaboration on this point.[19] See Adam, Marcet and Nicolini (2006).[20] See Morris and Shin (1998).[21] See Orphanides and Williams (2005). [22] A recent paper by Fed staff (Gürkayanak, Levin and Swanson 2006) finds that a well-known and credible inflation target helps anchor the private sector’s views on the distribution of long-run inflation outcomes. [23] See Cecchetti et al (2007).[24] See Mishkin (2007b) for a more elaborated exposition of this point. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen honour great pleasur address even would like take opportun discuss one issu puzzl time concern two year ecb execut board issu socal secondari object monetari polici well know treati establish european communiti state without prejudic overrid object price stabil ecb shall support general object communiti object spell articl treati name harmoni balanc sustain develop econom activ high level employ social protect sustain noninflationari growth econom social cohes object put level e specif hierarchi howev come part concern monetari polici statut european system central bank treati clear state primari object monetari polici price stabil object sustain growth employ support without prejudic price stabil word use treati seem impli two differ way monetari polici support sustain growth employ one without prejudic price stabil instead may constitut prejudic primari object therefor rais question contribut monetari polici make harmoni balanc sustain develop econom activ prejudic price stabil new question even came ecb hear european parliament ask without prejudic object price stabil view ecb fulfil secondari oblig treati contribut econom growth full employ instrument could ecb use interest question put past subsequ candid perhap one day somebodi final give right answer joke asid issu puzzl well mayb answer provid central banker academ expert monetari financi econom quit differ comment politician banker economist exampl would say best contribut monetari polici make sustain growth promot price stabil wherea certain politician comment argu time central bank includ ecb tend focus heavili inflat neglect growth employ rationalis explain reason differ view hope lay ground common understand person tempt adopt quit provoc line reason ask well would happen set primari object monetari polici achiev harmoni balanc sustain growth rather price stabil would monetari polici substanti differ one central bank pursu price stabil primari object case ecb would make differ answer depend under model economi one mind contend think monetari polici choic output stabil price stabil base view specif assumpt way economi function particular agent form expect assumpt relax realist view world adopt demonstr monetari polici choic want support growth consist promot price stabil medium term credibl fashion would like structur remark follow start simpl mainstream new keynesian model economi consid complic realist model base analysi explain general consensus among central banker virtual worldwid independ central bank statut formal state provid relev empir evid issu final would like discuss briefli risk involv environ price stabil main term complac policymak market particip conclud let start simpl theoret model standard new keynesian framework ration expect full inform central bank exist tradeoff output stabil price stabil depend natur shock hit economi demand shock pose dilemma monetari polici sinc interest rate reaction aim stabilis inflat consist aim stabilis output contrast cost push shock e shock drive inflat independ demand condit dilemma monetari polici sinc interest rate reaction stabilis inflat opposit direct requir stabilis output shock central bank must make choic stabilis inflat output combin analyt framework way central bank react cost push shock entail choic two compet object stabilis inflat variabl stabilis output variabl inde central bank aim primarili stabilis output would compromis inflat stabil vice versa would thus make differ term price stabil output stabil whether central bank primari object former latter explain interest observ market particip politician tri understand case also influenc central bank prefer key assumpt model central bank full knowledg structur economi shock affect agent fulli ration know perfect object prefer central bank fullinform fullyr context welldefin stabl tradeoff output inflat variabl known phillip curv central bank choos point along effici frontier ensur behaviour consist therefor valid agent expect repeat game context base analyt framework literatur develop normat prescript optim behaviour central bank describ accord optim polici rule condit structur economi shock hit type model certain use larg simplic thus abil deriv simpl polici rule central bank howev gap model realiti may bit wide let emphasis one key assumpt underpin model might bit unrealist model central bank consid sort god econom agent fulli believ like religi fanat world issu central bank credibl aris definit central bank full knowledg economi alway behav optim hit whatev target given one phillip curv along differ equilibria determin central bank decid point along curv decid target achiev howev although liken god may flatter central bank unfortun somewhat exagger remov realiti econom agent especi market particip certain believ uncondit central bank tend behav rather like st thoma see first believ thus central bank credibl cannot taken grant continu test right market suggest assumpt under theoret model use analys monetari polici might simplist substanti research carri recent year model inflat expect realist way model learn imperfect knowledg bound ration becom increas widespread monetari econom short model base signal extract problem wherebi econom agent learn albeit slowli imperfect manner under possibl timevari central bank prefer includ inflat target observ behaviour target time one look result inflat perform inflat expect tend particular sensit sustain deviat observ inflat announc perceiv target model economi hit shock temporarili increas inflat agent consid object central bank might chang possibl increas previous expect diverg inflat expect inflat target affect persist inflationari pressur follow exogen shock therebi make cost term lost output central bank bring inflat back target model singl tradeoff output inflat variabl multipl tradeoff depend way inflat expect form inflat expect rise whatev reason effici frontier output inflat stabilis shift outward rais output inflat variabl higher level inflat expect higher level output variabl given level inflat vice versa import inflat expect remain close possibl target especi exogen shock way keep inflationoutput tradeoff favour possibl thus minimis output inflat variabl sophist model anchor inflationari expect target essenti face cost push shock previous examin also face demand shock given lag impact demand shock output impact price former general quicker latter dynam inflat might differ substanti output growth especi turn point cycl pose challeng monetari polici presenc lessthanperfect foresightr expect instanc economi reach cyclic peak slowdown econom activ would normal tend preced adjust price dynam inflationari pressur might continu time especi presenc labour product market rigid ideal world perfect anchor inflat expect full central bank credibl consid initi would problem monetari polici inflat expect alway align target observ inflat adjust rapid cyclic condit circumst monetari polici follow quit close cyclic pattern output eas take place soon economi slow thus support econom activ contradict two object instead inflationari expect fulli align target central bank may well face dilemma economi slow central bank might decid reduc interest rate ignor inflationari pressur expect howev might creat suspicion econom agent central bank chang inflat target diverg inflat expect target might increas ad inflat persist volatil bring inflat central bank ultim maintain tight stanc longer period time despit econom slowdown add output volatil inflat expect allow disanchor monetari polici turn much restrict would case anchor expect inflat volatil come price greater output volatil inflat expect align target quicker monetari polici adjust under econom condit central bank communic public primari focus price stabil even economi slow anchor expect therefor align quick possibl interest rate polici under macroeconom condit sum world credibl taken grant e central bank infal tradeoff price stabil output stabil great diminish cost demand shock monetari polici support growth ensur price stabil credibl way central bank industri world follow approach deriv realist model describ consid infal rather see abil anchor expect key asset one take long time build also one lost quick condit maintain price stabil necessari foster sustain develop let give three recent quot three differ central bank leav guess come ecb keep inflat track meet target medium term thus ensur price stabil bank provid platform macroeconom stabil best contribut monetari polici make object high stabl level econom growth employ experi show low stabl inflat inflat expect also associ greater shortterm stabil output employ perhap part give central bank greater latitud counter transitori disturb economi sum achiev price stabil import also central attain mandat object maximum sustain employ moder longterm interest rate price stabil indispens prerequisit realiz sustain growth bank respons realiz price stabil appropri conduct monetari polici interest three quot reflect common view independ institut framework three central bank oper also under stage cycl various countri also reflect recent g communiqué april state financ minist central bank governor g continu commit maintain price stabil best contribut monetari polici make sustain global growth strike degre consensus policymak circl price stabil output stabil two side coin exploit tradeoff two object least medium term substanti amount evid confirm result deriv realist model indic inflat expect anchor monetari polici support econom activ econom histori shown inflat persist period great inflat much less persist period stabl price accord studi inflat appear less persist germani countri great inflat much less sever industri countri although debat surround moreov although mani explan great moder e radic reduct output growth volatil experienc last two decad general accept great disinfl accompani mark declin output volatil unit state also global scale japan except hand evid lower real gdp growth volatil obtain expens somewhat higher inflat volatil fact anyth opposit seem true also look across countri addit signific empir support proposit inflat negat affect longterm growth even relat low level inflat final also evid bank crise frequent countri high variabl inflat furthermor might reconsid view high macroeconom stabil unit state period follow mid might attribut increas monetari polici activ known resurrect finetun recent evid socal period great moder global phenomenon occur time great disinfl begin period stabl price although necessarili direct causal link two reduct output growth volatil mideighti end great inflat fact limit unit state moreov evid output growth volatil actual pick onset great inflat reinforc point long shortterm interest rate world also becom signific less variabl lower real term evid would seem confirm focus price stabil anchor inflat expect contribut reduc output volatil rather increas activ part feder reserv case recent research show differ institut structur mandat even environ lead central bank behav differ attempt combat inflat recent studi instanc compar behaviour ecb feder reserv background similar structur model estim respect euro area us data result show ecb follow estim monetari polici rule fed appli euro area economi contribut econom growth period would greater actual opposit hold true anoth paper use differ estim model euro area unit state found differ type size persist shock explain differ interest rate two area rather differ monetari polici reaction function would suggest comparison differ interest rate level differ time differ countri necessarili lead conclud central bank assign greater weight support econom activ anoth look recent period would like draw attent fact shortterm interest rate euro area current signific lower unit state basi point despit gdp growth stronger side atlant year might part link fact inflat expect systemat lower stabl euro area hold true comparison unit kingdom need understand inflat expect remain relat low stabl euro area market particip among best place answer question would contend reason ecb acquir year substanti credibl inflat fighter main reason interest rate relat low euro area confirm promot price stabil fulli consist actual best way promot sustain growth sum evid suggest central bank aim stabilis output growth primarili stabilis price anchor inflat expect consist model examin previous show achiev price stabil instrument sustain econom growth introduct provoc ask question whether monetari polici would differ growth rather price stabil primari object central bank argument present far would suggest negat answer sinc price stabil way achiev ultim object stabl sustain growth central bank statut mention price stabil main goal rather growth well sever reason one account growth depend mani thing price stabil one monetari polici held account deliv certain period time consid follow ultim object good diet healthier live longer howev diet set clear unambigu goal term number kilo pound easili monitor anoth reason much link featur econom model previous describ import anchor agent expect know littl inflat expect form expect phenomena like abrupt nonlinear studi exampl financ literatur may trigger appar irrelev event moreov expect go mark may hard bring back control assum inflat expect household firm financi market particip sometim receiv attent shown literatur presenc learn bound ration optim weight inflat reaction function central bank must higher one reason import clear quantit definit price stabil context institut framework safeguard central bank independ clear indic quantit definit price stabil monetari author may held account help ultim howev substitut track record abl determin maintain price stabil fact evid longterm inflat expect tradit lag rather lead indic actual inflat foster sustain growth matter pay societi whole central banker bit obsess inflat near end address would like mention briefli one risk may aris environ appar solid entrench price stabil current wit industri also develop countri risk refer complac complac central bank privat sector primarili market particip monetari author risk forget keep wellanchor inflat expect low inflat persist requir forwardlook decis reaction inflationari pressur central bank may occasion hard time convinc market particip public opinion monetari polici action requir time keep inflationari pressur control market particip risk inflat expect exampl embed bond yield progress lose inform adequ price protect possibl risk absenc adequ assess possibl insur sudden shift inflat expect could turn aggrav actual turmoil creat phenomena notori unpredict thus central bank move along fine line credibl avoid instil much complac market particip longerterm perspect forget remark macroeconom stabil wit past two decad rather except histori replet period appar unshak stabil prosper sudden broken instabl depress exampl due regard differ proport instabl follow first world war preced period stabil progress bell époqu time seem almost natur ever last said two decad second world war follow year econom financi instabl learnt episod develop institut notabl independ central bank task safeguard price stabil institut howev adequ perform function long run continu support attent market particip public larg also know circumst becom advers recent past sum risk forget inflat even dormant alway risk even cost sound bore ultim goal task central bank remind societi risk act counteract risk creat catch central bank must mention explain inflationari risk under economi might justifi polici action must also reassur market agent action counteract risk ultim price stabil ensur two messag necessarili easi get typic exampl difficulti question often put central bank talk inflat risk inflat low rais rate price stabil answer alway fulli understood inflat low central bank act ensur price stabil act base project under inflationari pressur histori analysi shown prevent central bank play role warn act prevent inflat produc growth main risk central bank becom victim socal goodhart law say target success variabl given instrument observ statist correl instrument target variabl tend vanish central bank interest rate polici success ensur price stabil time littl observ correl interest rate inflat certain make central bank task explain polici bit challeng certain bore conclud let reiter would call central bank consensus strong focus price stabil best contribut monetari polici make toward sustain growth focus inflat medium term rather combin inflat output stabil help anchor inflat expect keep inflat persist low thus foster output growth therefor central bank focus price stabil exact central bank aim promot sustain growth would know consensus wide share larg part academ world certain financi market particip ultim assess credibl central bank howev recognis consensus yet fulli share still question particular observ comment politician sometim social partner case answer tri give mani outsid observ influenc econom model base restrict assumpt might entir realist especi concern way interest rate determin financi market one assumpt central bank full knowledg economi infal also believ market particip infal rais seri paradox first model under hypothesi infal central bank often use intent put doubt central bank infal critic stubborn inflat fighter instead growth promot second paradox central bank follow critic suggest aim wrong target sure market particip start doubt infal happen central bank would incap exploit tradeoff would end higher inflat higher output variabl third paradox central bank credibl put question mayb critic would want expansionari polici way central bank regain credibl order support growth focus even fight inflat central bank statut mention price stabil object central banker paid worri inflat risk also make sure risk materialis particular act firm time fashion thank much attent k marcet j p nicolini stock market volatil learn present confer monetari polici asset market learn novemb european central bank bini smaghi l global monetari polici journal polici model forthcom blanchard o j simon long larg declin u output volatil brook paper econom activ pp blinder r rei understand greenspan standard cep work paper cecchetti hooper p kasman b c schoenholtz k l m w understand evolv inflat process paper present u monetari polici forum cecchetti floreslagun kraus assess sourc chang volatil real gdp growth nber work paper n christiano l r motto m rostagno shock structur polici euro area us journal econom dynam control forthcom demirguckunt e detragiach crosscountri empir studi system bank distress survey imf work paper n deutsch bank compar g central bank global econom perspect may elger b e jone b nilsson forecast monetari aggreg recent evid unit state journal econom busi pp erceg c levin imperfect credibl inflat persist journal monetari econom vol pp evan g w honkapohja learn expect macroeconom princeton princeton univers press gadzinski f f orlandi inflat persist european union euro area unit state ecb work paper n gerdesmei d f p mongelli b roffia eurosystem us feder reserv bank japan similar differ ecb work paper n gürkayanak r levin e swanson inflat target anchor longrun inflat expect evid longterm bond yield u u k sweden work paper judson r orphanid inflat volatil growth intern financ pp khan m senhadji threshold effect relationship inflat growth imf work paper n kohn d l inflat model policymak perspect remark quantit evid price determin confer washington d c septemb leduc sill k stark selffulfil expect inflat evid livingston survey work paper feder reserv bank philadelphiamishkin f monetari polici dual mandat speech bridgewat colleg virginia april mishkin f b inflat dynam remark annual macro confer feder reserv bank san francisco march morri h shin uniqu equilibrium model selffulfil currenc attack american econom review orphanid j c william declin activist stabil polici natur rate mispercept learn expect journal econom dynam control pp sahuc j g f smet differ interest rate polici ecb fed investig mediumscal dsge model journal money credit bank forthcom woodford m interest price foundat theori monetari polici princeton princeton univers press see woodford see evan honkapohja support empir evid exampl leduc sill stark show pre era temporari shock expect inflat led perman increas actual inflat due passiv monetari polici occur post due activ monetari polici letter mervyn king uk govern april bernank b semiannu monetari polici report congress februari see also mishkin similar view press releas bank japan march entitl introduct new framework conduct monetari polici gadzinski orlandi see exampl cecchetti floreslagun kraus see blanchard simon khan senhadji analys data countri period find threshold level inflat posit associ level inflat econom growth industri countri judson orphanid find evid inflat volatil contribut signific lower econom growth larg number countri see demirguckunt detragiach see blinder rei elger jone nilsson use regimeswitch var model two state forecast us inflat real output growth estim model one two state associ volatil macroeconom shock find clear separ two state time low volatil state prevail throughout high volatil state domin mid low volatil state prevail end sampl coincid great moder see bini smaghi see gerdesmei mongelli roffia market analysi see deutsch bank point fact feder reserv practic stricter inflat target ecb bank japan despit dual mandat christiano motto rostagno see sahuc smet see kohn elabor point see marcet nicolini see morri shin see orphanid william recent paper fed staff gürkayanak levin swanson find wellknown credibl inflat target help anchor privat sector view distribut longrun inflat outcom see cecchetti et al see mishkin b elabor exposit point reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en