Vítor Constâncio: The Future of the International Monetary System,23-11-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,4339,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen, It is with pleasure that I have accepted the invitation from the OMFIF Golden Series on World Money to talk about the future of the international monetary system. This subject has become very topical this year, not least in view of the discussions and progress achieved at the very recent Cannes Summit.  I will start by briefly recalling the key features of a good international monetary system and on this basis, I will try to define what are, in my view, the main weaknesses of the present system (or “non-system” as many describe it). This will allow me to dwell upon the possible evolution over the medium run of some of the main components of the international monetary system. When concluding, I will assess whether such an evolution may prove to be an adequate response to the challenges we are confronted with.The ultimate goal of the international monetary system (hereafter: IMS) is to maintain an orderly system of payments among nations. To this aim, the IMS has to provide the services of an international currency, ensure adequate creation of global liquidity, define an exchange rate regime among national currencies and include an adjustment mechanism to avoid excessive external real and financial imbalances across nations.Both global liquidity and the adjustment mechanism can be interpreted as global public goods (see e.g. Eichengreen 1987, Camdessus 1999, Dorrucci and McKay 2011). It is indeed only through access to global liquidity that it becomes possible to participate in, and finance, the global economy by using one or more reserve currencies as a means of payment, a unit of account or a store of value. And it is only through an efficient and effective adjustment mechanism that it becomes possible to benefit from “external stability”, namely a global sustainable constellation of cross-country economic linkages (e.g. via current accounts and asset/liability positions). Once external stability is achieved, cross-country linkages do not give rise to disruptive developments, such as disorderly exchange rate and asset price swings or contractions in real output and employment. External stability crucially depends on the policy behaviour of those issuers and holders of international currencies that are systemically relevant.The  exchange rate and capital flow regimes are probably the core elements of the adjustment mechanism, since they define the degree of flexibility of each IMS, i.e. its adaptability to changing economic circumstances. In contrast to the Bretton Woods system with fixed exchanges rates, semi-closed capital accounts and a strict adjustment mechanism, an IMS such as the present one enjoys a much higher degree of adaptability. Each country is free to choose its exchange rate and capital account regime, and the reserve-issuing countries face no IMS-embedded limits to the creation of global liquidity. This is a fundamental strength of today’s system, but it may also become – as we will see – a major weakness to the extent that it creates scope for unsustainable domestic growth models and the ensuing accumulation of real and financial imbalances. Besides the persistent external imbalances, there are many other shortcomings being mentioned about the present “non-system”. I can mention a few of them: abrupt reversal of capital flows; systematic inflows going from emerging to developed countries; inefficient accumulation of reserves by emerging countries; excessive exchange rate volatility ineffective to ensure external balance; asymmetry of adjustment pressure between deficit and surplus countries; absence of mechanisms to ensure the sufficient and timely supply of global liquidity in times of financial crises. This list means that, potentially, all the features of an IMS can be at stake in the present discussion, contrary to what happened in the late nineties when the discussion revolved around the functioning of the financial sector and the crisis prevention and resolution in emerging economies. The debate then was not about the reform of the IMS but rather about a new Global Financial Architecture, meaning the international framework for safeguarding and ensuring the efficient functioning of the global financial system. Today, after the start of the crisis in 2007, the issues under discussion are at the core of what constitutes an International Monetary System: 1) Are new international currencies necessary and/or unavoidable in the present circumstances? 2) Should changes be introduced in the foreign exchange regime? 3) Does the system need new and stronger instruments of liquidity provision, especially in times of financial crises? 4) What changes should be introduced in the adjustment mechanism? 5) Which reforms are needed in the about international regulation of the financial sector? I will not address this last point. Regarding the second issue on the exchange rate regime, I will only mention that I see no justification to change the floating regime among the major currencies or to modify the recommendation that big emerging economies should also adopt much more flexible rate regimes. This means that in the conflict characterised by MacKinnon (1994) between the international adjustment view of exchange rates and the monetary standard view, I take the side of the former. Also, the present situation of financial globalisation confirms the early ""bipolar view"" of Alexander Swoboda that with high capital mobility the only stable exchange rate regimes are floating rates or hard pegs, of which monetary unions are an extreme example (see Eichengreen, 2010).There are many predictions about the gradual addition of other currencies to the dollar as truly international currencies. What seems to make this unavoidable it is not only the emergence of the euro, the increasing strength of China or the growing vulnerabilities of the US. The growth in importance of emerging countries, that have seen their share in the world GDP augmented by 15 percentage points in the last 20 years, creates a structural increase for the demand of reserves that the developed countries, including the USA, will not be in a position to supply. This question is linked with the problem of the provision of official international liquidity. As Maurice Obstfeld (2011) has recently recalled, there is a fiscal dimension to the supply of official reserves. No single country in the world could indefinitely offer its currency as the reserve asset that could satisfy all the needs of a growing rest of the world. In the present circumstances where deficit and debt ratios need to be decreased, the US could not offer its bonds and T-bills as the almost exclusive reserve asset of the world. In this context, Euro assets are necessary. Even if they are clearly seen as an unrealistic prospect, Eurobonds, from the pure perspective of the International Monetary System, would be useful as a reserve asset for the world economy. In the future, the system will also need assets in the Chinese currency, when China will have a convertible currency, a flexible exchange rate and a developed bond market.All this implies that one possible scenario is the evolution towards a truly multi-polar IMS, which, as many have recently observed, would produce credible alternatives to dollar-denominated investments, thereby enhancing policy discipline in the core reserve issuer. Also, a multi-currency world would imply greater monetary policy autonomy in emerging economies such as China, which would thus be in a better position to tackle its own imbalances (see e.g. Bini Smaghi 2011). There are five key conditions for a currency to become a major international currency. The first one is having a very large economy, which engenders network externalities and lowers transaction costs. The second is given by deep, efficient and open financial markets. Third, good political and macroeconomic governance is of course of the essence to preserve the external value of a currency. Fourth, full enforcement of the rule of law is equally crucial as it ensures the protection of investors’ property rights. Fifth, one should not overlook the importance of geopolitical influence and political stability. It is therefore not easy for a currency to fill all the conditions necessary for it to have an international role. Consequently, I do not think that we will see a major change in the role of the US dollar over the next 10-15 years – though the conclusion may well be different over a longer horizon. The appearance of the euro as a new globally important currency has not produced a shift to a genuine duopoly in the supply of international currencies, and had little impact on the dollar’s centrality in the IMS. We are likely to see the shares of other currencies growing over time, but it is unlikely that there will be just one currency replacing the US dollar’s hegemony. The euro has established itself as the second most important international currency after the US dollar. At the same time, this role is predominantly regional in nature, since the euro is mainly used by economic agents resident in euro area neighbouring countries with special political and economic ties to the European Union and the euro area. More recently, it is known that Asian investors and foreign central banks accounted for a sizable share of the demand for bonds issued by the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF). Looking ahead, the share of the euro in international markets has the potential to rise further once financial stability and market integration is restored in the euro area. The ongoing efforts to improve the governance of the euro area and provide it with a credible crisis resolution mechanism will also indirectly affect the international use of the euro, even if the ECB and the Eurosystem do not take any initiatives to directly promote its use (Angeloni, Sapir 2011). This neutral stance – neither foster nor hinder – is based on our conviction that the international use of currencies should be a by-product of autonomous market decisions driven by the aforementioned five determinants.Turning to the Chinese  renminbi, one can observe that the use of the renminbi as an international currency has remained limited although China is now the third largest economy (after the United States and the euro area) and second largest exporter (after the euro area) of the world. The Chinese authorities have launched several initiatives since March 2009 to promote a wider international use of the renminbi, e.g. in trade invoicing, in deepening the role of the offshore centre played by Hong Kong S.A.R., or in agreeing local currency swap agreements with several central banks. Nevertheless, the full potential of the renminbi can ultimately only be achieved with the liberalisation of the capital account, accompanied by the reform of domestic financial markets. Once these will be in place, a major internationalisation of the renminbi will happen as a by-product. For the time being, Chinese authorities seem to be trying to prudently promote financial liberalization via experimenting with market-driven renminbi securities in Hong Kong S.A.R.. But this comes at the expense of increasing exposure to capital flows which poses challenges for the macro-prudential set-up, especially given the current undervaluation of the renminbi. Hence, Chinese authorities may also slow down the use of the renminbi abroad should tensions for domestic policy makers mount. All in all, the potential for the renminbi to upgrade as an international currency is clearly huge, but the timing is difficult to predict. I share Kregel’s (2010) view that “the basic problem [with the current IMS] is not the particular national liability that serves as the international currency, but the failure of an efficient adjustment mechanism for global imbalances”.Indeed, one needs only to look at the problem of global payment imbalances to find weaknesses of the current IMS, or rather “non-system”. The build up of increasingly large current account surpluses in some export-oriented economies, which rely on a growth-model based on over-savings, was, in conjunction with accumulating deficits in a number of consumption-driven economies, a major source of concern in the years which preceded the global financial crisis. Such imbalances were coupled with “twin gluts” in global liquidity and planned savings which led to historically low risk premia – the main symptom that systemic risk was escalating in the presence of easy finance accommodating complacent borrowers.Even the global financial crisis and the policy responses have reduced the imbalances only partly and temporarily over the most recent years. The fact that these imbalances have persisted for so long exposes a key weakness of the system, namely the inadequacy of the adjustment mechanisms. Let me explain this in more detail by looking at the various stakeholders:  National authorities in deficit and surplus countries had little incentives to depart from their growth model and policy course. Indeed, prior to the crisis the economies with the largest external imbalances were often outperforming their peers in terms of GDP growth: the larger the imbalance, the higher was the growth rate over the short run. Moreover, the deficit and surplus countries, rather than exerting policy discipline on each other, in fact accommodated the other in the pursuit of their respective growth models (see Dooley et al. 2003).  Market discipline also proved partly unreliable for a number of reasons. Firstly, markets frequently do not function in line with fundamentals as expected, leading to mispricing and undue volatility in, for example, exchange rates and credit risk premia. This may be explained in part by factors such as herding behaviour, but also the lack of a shared view on the relevant fundamentals. Secondly, market behaviour has also been constrained by structural factors and policy regimes. On the deficit side, the fact that the United States provides the deepest and most liquid financial market - and issues the dominant reserve currency - provides it with an unparalleled platform to offer “safe” debt instruments. The insatiable demand for such debt instruments puts strong pressure on the US financial system and its incentives (Caballero 2009). At the same time, the US derives its “exorbitant privilege” from this situation. The demand for US assets constrains the growth in credit and exchange rate risk premia charged by markets on rising US debt. This effectively limits the increase in external borrowing costs, thus removing an incentive to curb borrowing. On the surplus side, the semi-fixed exchange rate regimes and the semi-closed capital account of some major surplus countries prevent markets from exerting excessive pressure on capital flows or the exchange rate of such countries. Thirdly, accommodated by a trend towards self-regulation, financial markets encouraged rather than tamed excessive borrowing. Income constraints on debt accumulation were circumvented through innovative debt instruments, which were insufficiently checked by quality credit analysis and internal controls. Moreover, in the search for yield and diversification, capital flows to emerging markets and “carry trade economies” have surged, prompting, in certain cases, the imposition of capital controls to limit the potentially disruptive influences of both excess inflows and their reversals. The international community has a role to play in exerting pressure on countries to adjust, primarily the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the G20. Although helpful policy recommendations have been put forward at the global level, the traction gained by the international community has often not been as strong as it needed to be. The IMF, to some extent, has been hampered in its efforts to ensure the stability of the IMS. The existing rules were designed for the pre-globalisation era and the enforcement mechanisms are not sufficiently effective. Regarding the rules, these were agreed in an era of fixed exchange rates, closed capital accounts and highly regulated financial markets when the financial sector was the handmaiden of the real economy. This was well before the widespread liberalisation of trade, financial markets and capital accounts that defines globalisation. For example, under the IMF Articles of Agreement, members are free to pursue capital account regimes and exchange rate regimes of their choice, with only limited constraints. The outcome is a global constellation of exchange rate regimes that does not ensure sustained economic, financial and monetary stability. The peg of currencies of a number of emerging economies to the US dollar creates a symbiosis that fosters ever larger imbalances and hence risks of disorderly adjustment. Particularly when one of the emerging economies is very large, the pegging of its currency to another risks limiting the flexibility of adjustment in both, which in turn threatens to distort the exchange rate of other major currency pairs, with implications for global economic performance. Turning to the enforcement mechanisms, surveillance and peer policy review have an essential role to play in identifying risks and encouraging remedial policy action. But international pressure – including via the IMF and the G20 – still suffers from lack of grip. Even when risks are correctly identified and policy recommendations are appropriate, as it happened during IMF’s multilateral consultations in 2006-07, there is no guarantee of necessary policy adjustments being made. This remains the weakest aspect of the surveillance process.The crisis has led to increased efforts to improve surveillance, e.g. with the transformation of the Financial Stability Forum into the Financial Stability Board (FSB) with an enlarged membership and broadened mandate, changes inside the IMF, and the launching of the G20 Framework for Strong, Sustainable, and Balanced Growth and its Mutual Assessment Process. There is a general recognition of the need to strengthen the multilateral angle of surveillance, to better encompass interlinkages and spillover effects, and to better integrate macroeconomic and financial sector. More work needs to be done, however, to further strengthen the effectiveness of surveillance. There is no widespread consensus yet on how a country’s policies impact on other countries and – more importantly – no willingness of countries to submit themselves to closer scrutiny. By contrast, we can observe a lot of mutual finger-pointing, mainly between advanced and emerging economies, but to some extent also within the two groups. It follows that EMEs push for an inclusion of global liquidity and its drivers into multilateral surveillance, whereas advanced countries see a need for more scrutiny of reserve accumulation practices, exchange rate policies and capital controls. Against this background, it is also obvious that a lot of countries do not have any appetite to change the IMF’s Articles of Agreement to ratify a broadening and strengthening of surveillance. What can be done in such circumstances? I think that first of all we need to work even harder to achieve a better understanding of interlinkages and spillover effects. This implies the need for more and better analysis. The new pilot spillover reports that the IMF started this year with a handful of systemically important countries are one welcome step in that direction. Further research on the impact of policies in systemically important economies on global liquidity conditions and on capital flows will also help framing the discussions. Going forward, better awareness, a certain spirit of multilateralism and, last but not least, improved mechanisms to foster traction of policy advice will be crucial elements to strengthen the effectiveness of surveillance in contributing to global stability. Another area in which views are very much divided is the debate about the enhancement of official liquidity provision. One idea is to strength the so-called global financial safety net (GFSN). It would be used in those exceptional situations when countries with sound fundamentals suffer from financial market disruptions – such as foreign currency liquidity shortages or sudden stops in capital inflows – caused by contagion from major (e.g. Lehman-type) external shocks  Also here significant progress has been achieved over the last years: IMF resources have been tripled compared to 2008, access rights to IMF financing increased, and new facilities were created. But some believe that this is not enough, and argue with pertinent arguments, that further enhancing the global financial safety net would provide incentives for countries to decrease their reserve holdings (see Fahri, Gourinchas and Rey, 2011). However, as I mentioned earlier, the accumulation of large stocks of reserves is not only based on precautionary motives. Even the most customer-friendly IMF facilities might not lead countries to lower their reserves since they offer a higher level of comfort and convenience than IMF facilities. At the same time, countries might face problems in actually using their reserves in times of crisis, given that markets might not focus on the absolute level, but rather on the relative changes. Further reforms of the Fund’s toolkit need to be based on a thorough assessment of the experience with the existing tools and the resource implications further insurance-type facilities would have. The call for increased Fund resources, which is recently being voiced again, has also to be assessed carefully in light of existing and potential demand for Fund support. Concerning another SDR allocation, one should consider that during the recent crisis only a very small amount of SDRs allocated in 2009 has actually been converted into usable currencies. What would seem to be justified is to foresee established mechanisms to provide liquidity in times of financial crises when private liquidity suddenly disappears. In this context there have been also calls on central banks to establish a permanent scheme of swap lines to help countries in times of systemic stress. However, while central banks will certainly continue to assume their responsibilities in times of distress, they cannot commit ex-ante to any significant provision of liquidity as this could interfere with their mandate and create moral hazard. Will the changes in the IMS which, based on current information, we are likely to witness over the next ten-fifteen years be sufficient to make it resilient and sustainable? I am certainly not among those who consider that this is the case. But then, what further changes are indispensable? The answer to this question depends upon the longer-term vision. If we are really heading towards a multi-polar system, this may well set stronger incentives for policy discipline, since the exorbitant privilege will be more widely shared. But will the road towards the new multi-polar system be smooth or very bumpy? Well, a lot will depend on the path of further financial market development, capital account liberalisation and exchange rate flexibility in EMEs, since this will progressively reduce the demand for safe debt instruments issued by advanced economies. It will also allow a better channelling of domestic credit to investment and consumption, which in turn will help to promote growth driven by domestic demand. And a lot will obviously also depend on the ability of advanced economies, starting with the euro area, to learn the appropriate lessons from the current sovereign debt and banking crisis. The speed and scope of this process will depend on decisions of policy makers and market participants in the various parts of this world. If this whole process will be resolute and gradual at the same time, it should allow for an orderly transition towards a multi-polar IMS. Another question is whether the new IMS would be steady in nature or whether a new hegemon would emerge possibly to accomplish the “hegemonic stability theory” promoted by Kindleberger (Kindleberger, 1970). The answer will, again, depend predominantly on policy-makers. It remains to be seen whether the currency competitors of such a multi-polar world will be of relatively close weight, both in economic and financial terms, but also with respect to the political and governance factors discussed before when considering the preconditions for a currency to become a major international currency. As regards the necessary changes to international cooperation, we will need to see a greater awareness among global partners about their interlinkages and the ensuing responsibilities to ensure the stability of the whole system. I am convinced that, without a minimum spirit of multilateralism and a minimum degree of cooperation, no future IMS will remain stable for long. It is to be hoped that countries, especially those with systemic relevance, understand that it is in their best self-interest to consider externalities and cooperate. But such “enlightenment” alone will not be sufficient to ensure stability. If the IMS as such does not deliver the right incentives, the international community will have to eventually agree on enhanced adjustment mechanisms, e.g. in order to foster the traction of policy recommendations. It is to be hoped that we do not need another global crisis to instil the necessary incentives. Angeloni, Bénassy-Quéré, Carton, Darvas, Destais, Pisani-Ferry, Sapir and Vallée (2011): “Global currencies for tomorrow: A European perspective”, Bruegel Blueprint Series, vol. XIII.Angeloni, I and Sapir, A. (2011), The international monetary system is changing: What opportunities for Europe?, paper for Bruegel-PIIE Conference The Transatlantic Relationship in an Era of Growing Multipolarity, Berlin, 27 September 2010.Bini Smaghi, L. (2011): “The Triffin dilemma revisited”, speech at the Conference on the International Monetary System: sustainability and reform proposals, marking the 100th anniversary of Robert Triffin; the Triffin International Foundation, Brussels, 3 October 2011. Caballero, R. (2009), “The ‘Other’ Imbalance and the Financial Crisis”, paper for the Baffi Lecture delivered at the Banca d’Italia, 10 December.Camdessus, M. (1999), “International Financial and Monetary Stability: A Global Public Good?”, remarks at the IMF/Research Conference entitled “Key Issues in Reform of the International Monetary and Financial System”, Washington, D.C., 28 May.Dorrucci, E. and McKay, J. (2011), The International Monetary System after the Financial Crisis, Occasional Paper Series, No 123, ECB, Frankfurt am Mai, February.Dooley, M.P., Folkerts-Landau, D. and Garber, P. (2003), “An essay on the revived Bretton Woods System”, NBER Working Papers, No 9971, National Bureau of Economic Research, September.Eichengreen, B. (2010) “Exchange rate regimes and capital mobility: how much of the Swoboda thesis survives?” in Charles Wyplosz (ed) “ The New International Monetary System”  Routledge.Eichengreen, B. (2011), Exorbitant Privilege – The Decline of the Dollar and the Future of the International Monetary System, Oxford University Press, January.Eichengreen (1987), “Hegemonic Stability Theories of the International Monetary System”, NBER Working Papers, No 2193, National Bureau of Economic Research, March.Farhi, E., Gourinchas, P-O and Rey, H. (2011) “Reforming the International Monetary System” CEPRKindleberger, C. (1970): “ Power and Money. The Economics of International Politics and the Politics of International Economics”, Basic Books, New York.Kregel, J. (2010), “An Alternative Perspective on Global Imbalances and International Reserve Currencies” – Economic Public Policy Brief Archive, Levy Economics Institute McKinnon, Ronald (1994) Discussion of Peter Kenen “Floating exchange rate regimes reconsidered” in Peter B. Kenen et al (ed) “The International Monetary System” Cambridge University Press, page 165Obstfeld, Maurice (2011) “International liquidity: the fiscal dimension” Keynote speech at the Bank of Japan, Institute of Monetary and Economic Studies, International Conference, Tokyo, June 2-3, 2011.Triffin, R. (1960): “Gold and the dollar crisis”, Yale University Press, New Haven.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen pleasur accept invit omfif golden seri world money talk futur intern monetari system subject becom topic year least view discuss progress achiev recent cann summit start briefli recal key featur good intern monetari system basi tri defin view main weak present system nonsystem mani describ allow dwell upon possibl evolut medium run main compon intern monetari system conclud assess whether evolut may prove adequ respons challeng confront ultim goal intern monetari system hereaft im maintain order system payment among nation aim im provid servic intern currenc ensur adequ creation global liquid defin exchang rate regim among nation currenc includ adjust mechan avoid excess extern real financi imbal across nation global liquid adjust mechan interpret global public good see e g eichengreen camdessus dorrucci mckay inde access global liquid becom possibl particip financ global economi use one reserv currenc mean payment unit account store valu effici effect adjust mechan becom possibl benefit extern stabil name global sustain constel crosscountri econom linkag e g via current account assetli posit extern stabil achiev crosscountri linkag give rise disrupt develop disord exchang rate asset price swing contract real output employ extern stabil crucial depend polici behaviour issuer holder intern currenc system relev exchang rate capit flow regim probabl core element adjust mechan sinc defin degre flexibl im e adapt chang econom circumst contrast bretton wood system fix exchang rate semiclos capit account strict adjust mechan im present one enjoy much higher degre adapt countri free choos exchang rate capit account regim reserveissu countri face imsembed limit creation global liquid fundament strength today system may also becom see major weak extent creat scope unsustain domest growth model ensu accumul real financi imbal besid persist extern imbal mani shortcom mention present nonsystem mention abrupt revers capit flow systemat inflow go emerg develop countri ineffici accumul reserv emerg countri excess exchang rate volatil ineffect ensur extern balanc asymmetri adjust pressur deficit surplus countri absenc mechan ensur suffici time suppli global liquid time financi crise list mean potenti featur im stake present discuss contrari happen late nineti discuss revolv around function financi sector crisi prevent resolut emerg economi debat reform im rather new global financi architectur mean intern framework safeguard ensur effici function global financi system today start crisi issu discuss core constitut intern monetari system new intern currenc necessari andor unavoid present circumst chang introduc foreign exchang regim system need new stronger instrument liquid provis especi time financi crise chang introduc adjust mechan reform need intern regul financi sector address last point regard second issu exchang rate regim mention see justif chang float regim among major currenc modifi recommend big emerg economi also adopt much flexibl rate regim mean conflict characteris mackinnon intern adjust view exchang rate monetari standard view take side former also present situat financi globalis confirm earli bipolar view alexand high capit mobil stabl exchang rate regim float rate hard peg monetari union extrem exampl see eichengreen mani predict gradual addit currenc dollar truli intern currenc seem make unavoid emerg euro increas strength china grow vulner us growth import emerg countri seen share world gdp augment percentag point last year creat structur increas demand reserv develop countri includ usa posit suppli question link problem provis offici intern liquid mauric obstfeld recent recal fiscal dimens suppli offici reserv singl countri world could indefinit offer currenc reserv asset could satisfi need grow rest world present circumst deficit debt ratio need decreas us could offer bond tbill almost exclus reserv asset world context euro asset necessari even clear seen unrealist prospect eurobond pure perspect intern monetari system would use reserv asset world economi futur system also need asset chines currenc china convert currenc flexibl exchang rate develop bond market impli one possibl scenario evolut toward truli multipolar im mani recent observ would produc credibl altern dollardenomin invest therebi enhanc polici disciplin core reserv issuer also multicurr world would impli greater monetari polici autonomi emerg economi china would thus better posit tackl imbal see e g bini smaghi five key condit currenc becom major intern currenc first one larg economi engend network extern lower transact cost second given deep effici open financi market third good polit macroeconom govern cours essenc preserv extern valu currenc fourth full enforc rule law equal crucial ensur protect investor properti right fifth one overlook import geopolit influenc polit stabil therefor easi currenc fill condit necessari intern role consequ think see major chang role us dollar next year though conclus may well differ longer horizon appear euro new global import currenc produc shift genuin duopoli suppli intern currenc littl impact dollar central im like see share currenc grow time unlik one currenc replac us dollar hegemoni euro establish second import intern currenc us dollar time role predomin region natur sinc euro main use econom agent resid euro area neighbour countri special polit econom tie european union euro area recent known asian investor foreign central bank account sizabl share demand bond issu european financi stabil facil efsf look ahead share euro intern market potenti rise financi stabil market integr restor euro area ongo effort improv govern euro area provid credibl crisi resolut mechan also indirect affect intern use euro even ecb eurosystem take initi direct promot use angeloni sapir neutral stanc neither foster hinder base convict intern use currenc byproduct autonom market decis driven aforement five determin turn chines renminbi one observ use renminbi intern currenc remain limit although china third largest economi unit state euro area second largest export euro area world chines author launch sever initi sinc march promot wider intern use renminbi e g trade invoic deepen role offshor centr play hong kong r agre local currenc swap agreement sever central bank nevertheless full potenti renminbi ultim achiev liberalis capit account accompani reform domest financi market place major internationalis renminbi happen byproduct time chines author seem tri prudent promot financi liber via experi marketdriven renminbi secur hong kong r come expens increas exposur capit flow pose challeng macroprudenti setup especi given current undervalu renminbi henc chines author may also slow use renminbi abroad tension domest polici maker mount potenti renminbi upgrad intern currenc clear huge time difficult predict share kregel view basic problem current im particular nation liabil serv intern currenc failur effici adjust mechan global imbal inde one need look problem global payment imbal find weak current im rather nonsystem build increas larg current account surplus exportori economi reli growthmodel base oversav conjunct accumul deficit number consumptiondriven economi major sourc concern year preced global financi crisi imbal coupl twin glut global liquid plan save led histor low risk premia main symptom system risk escal presenc easi financ accommod complac borrow even global financi crisi polici respons reduc imbal part temporarili recent year fact imbal persist long expos key weak system name inadequaci adjust mechan let explain detail look various stakehold nation author deficit surplus countri littl incent depart growth model polici cours inde prior crisi economi largest extern imbal often outperform peer term gdp growth larger imbal higher growth rate short run moreov deficit surplus countri rather exert polici disciplin fact accommod pursuit respect growth model see dooley et al market disciplin also prove part unreli number reason first market frequent function line fundament expect lead mispric undu volatil exampl exchang rate credit risk premia may explain part factor herd behaviour also lack share view relev fundament second market behaviour also constrain structur factor polici regim deficit side fact unit state provid deepest liquid financi market issu domin reserv currenc provid unparallel platform offer safe debt instrument insati demand debt instrument put strong pressur us financi system incent caballero time us deriv exorbit privileg situat demand us asset constrain growth credit exchang rate risk premia charg market rise us debt effect limit increas extern borrow cost thus remov incent curb borrow surplus side semifix exchang rate regim semiclos capit account major surplus countri prevent market exert excess pressur capit flow exchang rate countri third accommod trend toward selfregul financi market encourag rather tame excess borrow incom constraint debt accumul circumv innov debt instrument insuffici check qualiti credit analysi intern control moreov search yield diversif capit flow emerg market carri trade economi surg prompt certain case imposit capit control limit potenti disrupt influenc excess inflow revers intern communiti role play exert pressur countri adjust primarili intern monetari fund imf g although help polici recommend put forward global level traction gain intern communiti often strong need imf extent hamper effort ensur stabil im exist rule design preglobalis era enforc mechan suffici effect regard rule agre era fix exchang rate close capit account high regul financi market financi sector handmaiden real economi well widespread liberalis trade financi market capit account defin globalis exampl imf articl agreement member free pursu capit account regim exchang rate regim choic limit constraint outcom global constel exchang rate regim ensur sustain econom financi monetari stabil peg currenc number emerg economi us dollar creat symbiosi foster ever larger imbal henc risk disord adjust particular one emerg economi larg peg currenc anoth risk limit flexibl adjust turn threaten distort exchang rate major currenc pair implic global econom perform turn enforc mechan surveil peer polici review essenti role play identifi risk encourag remedi polici action intern pressur includ via imf g still suffer lack grip even risk correct identifi polici recommend appropri happen imf multilater consult guarante necessari polici adjust made remain weakest aspect surveil process crisi led increas effort improv surveil e g transform financi stabil forum financi stabil board fsb enlarg membership broaden mandat chang insid imf launch g framework strong sustain balanc growth mutual assess process general recognit need strengthen multilater angl surveil better encompass interlinkag spillov effect better integr macroeconom financi sector work need done howev strengthen effect surveil widespread consensus yet countri polici impact countri import willing countri submit closer scrutini contrast observ lot mutual fingerpoint main advanc emerg economi extent also within two group follow eme push inclus global liquid driver multilater surveil wherea advanc countri see need scrutini reserv accumul practic exchang rate polici capit control background also obvious lot countri appetit chang imf articl agreement ratifi broaden strengthen surveil done circumst think first need work even harder achiev better understand interlinkag spillov effect impli need better analysi new pilot spillov report imf start year hand system import countri one welcom step direct research impact polici system import economi global liquid condit capit flow also help frame discuss go forward better awar certain spirit multilater last least improv mechan foster traction polici advic crucial element strengthen effect surveil contribut global stabil anoth area view much divid debat enhanc offici liquid provis one idea strength socal global financi safeti net gfsn would use except situat countri sound fundament suffer financi market disrupt foreign currenc liquid shortag sudden stop capit inflow caus contagion major e g lehmantyp extern shock also signific progress achiev last year imf resourc tripl compar access right imf financ increas new facil creat believ enough argu pertin argument enhanc global financi safeti net would provid incent countri decreas reserv hold see fahri gourincha rey howev mention earlier accumul larg stock reserv base precautionari motiv even customerfriend imf facil might lead countri lower reserv sinc offer higher level comfort conveni imf facil time countri might face problem actual use reserv time crisi given market might focus absolut level rather relat chang reform fund toolkit need base thorough assess experi exist tool resourc implic insurancetyp facil would call increas fund resourc recent voic also assess care light exist potenti demand fund support concern anoth sdr alloc one consid recent crisi small amount sdrs alloc actual convert usabl currenc would seem justifi forese establish mechan provid liquid time financi crise privat liquid sudden disappear context also call central bank establish perman scheme swap line help countri time system stress howev central bank certain continu assum respons time distress cannot commit exant signific provis liquid could interfer mandat creat moral hazard chang im base current inform like wit next tenfifteen year suffici make resili sustain certain among consid case chang indispens answer question depend upon longerterm vision realli head toward multipolar system may well set stronger incent polici disciplin sinc exorbit privileg wide share road toward new multipolar system smooth bumpi well lot depend path financi market develop capit account liberalis exchang rate flexibl eme sinc progress reduc demand safe debt instrument issu advanc economi also allow better channel domest credit invest consumpt turn help promot growth driven domest demand lot obvious also depend abil advanc economi start euro area learn appropri lesson current sovereign debt bank crisi speed scope process depend decis polici maker market particip various part world whole process resolut gradual time allow order transit toward multipolar im anoth question whether new im would steadi natur whether new hegemon would emerg possibl accomplish hegemon stabil theori promot kindleberg kindleberg answer depend predomin policymak remain seen whether currenc competitor multipolar world relat close weight econom financi term also respect polit govern factor discuss consid precondit currenc becom major intern currenc regard necessari chang intern cooper need see greater awar among global partner interlinkag ensu respons ensur stabil whole system convinc without minimum spirit multilater minimum degre cooper futur im remain stabl long hope countri especi system relev understand best selfinterest consid extern cooper enlighten alon suffici ensur stabil im deliv right incent intern communiti eventu agre enhanc adjust mechan e g order foster traction polici recommend hope need anoth global crisi instil necessari incent angeloni bénassyquéré carton darva destai pisaniferri sapir vallé global currenc tomorrow european perspect bruegel blueprint seri vol xiii angeloni sapir intern monetari system chang opportun europ paper bruegelpii confer transatlant relationship era grow multipolar berlin septemb bini smaghi l triffin dilemma revisit speech confer intern monetari system sustain reform propos mark th anniversari robert triffin triffin intern foundat brussel octob caballero r imbal financi crisi paper baffi lectur deliv banca d italia decemb camdessus m intern financi monetari stabil global public good remark imfresearch confer entitl key issu reform intern monetari financi system washington d c may dorrucci e mckay j intern monetari system financi crisi occasion paper seri ecb frankfurt mai februari dooley m p folkertslandau d garber p essay reviv bretton wood system nber work paper nation bureau econom research septemb eichengreen b exchang rate regim capit mobil much thesi surviv charl wyplosz ed new intern monetari system routledg eichengreen b exorbit privileg declin dollar futur intern monetari system oxford univers press januari eichengreen hegemon stabil theori intern monetari system nber work paper nation bureau econom research march farhi e gourincha po rey h reform intern monetari system ceprkindleberg c power money econom intern polit polit intern econom basic book new york kregel j altern perspect global imbal intern reserv currenc econom public polici brief archiv levi econom institut mckinnon ronald discuss peter kenen float exchang rate regim reconsid peter b kenen et al ed intern monetari system cambridg univers press page obstfeld mauric intern liquid fiscal dimens keynot speech bank japan institut monetari econom studi intern confer tokyo june triffin r gold dollar crisi yale univers press new haven reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en