Jörg Asmussen: Is Europe on the right track?,20-03-2013,European Central Bank,ECB,2305,"<p>Dear Ms. Siebert,Dear Mr. Leithner,Ladies and gentlemen,Thank you very much for inviting me to speak at the Women in European Business Conference organised by Deutsche Bank.The topic of this year’s conference – the quest for growth – could scarcely be more relevant for Europe today.As this audience knows better than most, the low growth environment is posing serious challenges for businesses. Uncertainty about the future is a drag on confidence and a barrier to new investment. It causes banks to cut back on lending, especially to small- and medium-sized firms, which are critical to help growth rebound.And above all, low growth is deeply affecting the lives of ordinary people in Europe. As a result, many are frustrated, and some are even desperate. They doubt whether the European strategy to deal with the crisis is the right one. They are asking: “Will we ever come out of it, with ever more cuts and austerity?” And it is right and legitimate that they are asking this. “Power of the masses” is a key theme of this conference. We are democratic societies in Europe and these important choices about the future of our countries and our monetary union require a proper public debate. But this debate also needs to be based on substance. Rage alone does not solve our problems. Just being angry at politicians or officials, even if justified, does not help citizens understand the crisis. People need to be presented with the real choices facing them – even if that means taking hard decisions or making sacrifices.Offering allegedly easy solutions, or presenting false alternatives, abandons the debate to populists and gambles with the long-term prosperity of our societies. So today I would like to present my view on the choices that are facing Europe – and in doing so, to expose some of the myths and misconceptions about the European approach to managing the crisis. Concretely, I want to answer two questions:First, are there alternatives to the current strategy, and if so, what are their real consequences?Second, are we condemned to a “lost decade”, or can we find new sources of growth to lift us out of the crisis? Policy-makers sometimes speak about certain courses of action as being without alternatives – “alternativlos” as we say in German.Of course, this is not true. There always are alternatives. The question is whether they are superior, especially when assessing their likely impact and longer-term consequences. So let me begin by looking at those alternatives.As you know, one pillar of the crisis response in Europe has been to consolidate government budgets. Progress has so far been good: the European Commission estimates that, by the end of this year, the euro area as a whole will have a budget deficit below 3% of GDP.But this progress has also had costs in the short term: growth has turned out to be lower than forecast and unemployment has risen steeply. Almost 19 million people in the euro area are currently without jobs – this includes almost one in every four young people.In the face of this hardship, the strategy of reducing deficits has come under increasing criticism from commentators and politicians.Some now urge an “exit from the austerity cage”.Others claim that, by continuing to cut deficits when growth is so low, policy-makers are ignoring the evidence, even being ideological. To exit the crisis, they say, Europe must engage in an urgent change of course: more time, less austerity; more public money, less reform.Let me be clear: I am also very concerned by the high level of unemployment. I would also like to see stronger growth.But before proposing to change course, we need to think through the consequences. This is what responsible policymaking means.And put simply, the consequence of stopping cutting deficits is to increase public debts. Is this a feasible or sustainable solution to our problems?In my view, the answer is ‘no’.First, regardless of its merits, such a strategy would only work if private investors were willing to finance higher borrowing at reasonable rates. And that is certainly a big “if”, especially for countries whose debts are already very high and rising.Second, it is an illusion to think that more debt is the answer to this debt crisis. Recent research has shown that high public debt levels in the euro area hamper growth, with a serious negative effect starting when debt exceeds 90% of GDP. Average euro area public debt is already above that level – almost 95% of GDP –so adding more debt will only put us further into the danger zone.Third, a strategy of increasing debt simply pushes problems in to the future. Any benefits for the current generation come at the expense of future generations. Higher borrowing today means higher interest payments tomorrow – which have to be paid off with the taxes of tomorrow’s citizens.Moreover, the more today’s generation consumes, the more future generations will have to save to get the debt level back down again. And they will have to do this: as part of the new EU debt rule, all euro area countries are legally bound to start reducing their public debts below 60% of GDP.To give a sense of what this means, take the example of Italy. Public debt is almost 130% of GDP, so it will have to be more than halved by the next generation to abide by the debt limit.Around 80 billion euros a year goes on debt service – this is more than 10% of the annual budget, which is not being spent on education or infrastructure. On top of this, future generations will face a number of hidden costs that have not yet been factored into the debt figures. These include the effects of an ageing society and the unknown consequences of a changing climate. To take the example of Germany, the European Commission projects in its 2012 Ageing Report that the working age population will fall by more than 30% by 2060. At the same time, its age-related spending will continue to increase. This means that, year after year, there will be an ever smaller number of workers supporting an ever larger social security system.In other words, future generations are already carrying major burden. Is it fair to them, by increasing debt today, to make it heavier still?The economist John Maynard Keynes famously dismissed long-term considerations with the argument that “in the long-run we’re all dead”. This is true – we are, but our children and grandchildren are not. By ensuring fiscal soundness today, we represent their voice in the current debate.To sum up, I question the benefits of changing course, not because I am satisfied with the current situation, but because the alternatives available are worse. They mean placing short-term expediency over long-term sustainability – which, for me, is the opposite of responsible policy-making. Citizens have to take decisions of great importance about their future – most directly so when they are asked to at the ballot box. By casting their votes, they make choices that will not only determine their lives, but also those of the generations to come. They deserve to have the full picture of the alternatives they are facing before they do.But citizens still rightly ask: where will growth come from?This leads me to the second theme of my address today. Is the euro area condemned to a “lost decade” of low growth and high unemployment? Or are there new sources of growth we can exploit to get out of this crisis?Here, the answer depends on governments themselves. The truth is that they are not out of options when it comes to growth. There are new sources of growth that can be tapped, even while budgets are being cut.But to do so, they have to implement the other pillar of the European strategy. They have to enact deep-rooted economic reforms that increase the potential of their economies to grow.Reforms to open markets, increase competition, and remove bureaucracy. Reforms to advance innovation, encourage entrepreneurship, and help public administration actually serve the public. These reforms are not easy to implement. They require tough choices, perseverance to confront vested interests, and patience for the effects to become visible.But their potential is huge. To give a sense of what can be achieved, recent research from the IMF [1] finds that euro area countries could boost their GDP by more than 3% over five years by opening markets to competition and reforming tax systems. And they could also do a lot to support growth by removing the remaining barriers to a Single Market in Europe – in particular by completing the Single Market in services. The European Commission estimates that implementing the Services Directive – which covers activities that make up around 40% of EU GDP – could reap additional gains of 330 billion euro, or more than 2.5% of EU GDP, over five to ten years. And this only requires implementing legislation that has already been agreed.Higher growth is not the only benefit from reforms: they also contribute to a social fairness. As the OECD Going for Growth 2012 report put it, this is the “Double Dividend” of structural reforms.Commentators who criticise the social consequences of the European strategy often forget this element and focus only on the effect of budget cuts – which can sometimes fall hardest on vulnerable groups in society. But well-designed reforms can have the opposite effect: they can in fact create opportunities for people on the margins of society.Let me allude to this:In Spain, there is a rigid two-tier labour market which protects insiders. This means that young people, on flexible contracts, bear the burden of an economic downturn. As a result, almost 6 out of 10 are currently unemployed.In another country, the administration of tax collection is weak which leads to enormous amounts of tax arrears. As a result, ordinary people who are taxed on their salaries have to pay more to make up the difference.These are both cases where lack of reforms leads to unfair outcomes – and so where structural reforms could help towards a fairer society. Ultimately, with structural reforms, the winners outnumber the potential losers. It is time this message gets more attention.However, we should not fall into the trap of thinking that it is only struggling countries that need to take hard decisions. We are all competing today, both within Europe and with the rest of the world. There can be no sitting back, for any country.Germany was a decade ago called ‘the Sick Man of Europe’; people were wondering publicly if “Germany can be saved”. Since then, the country has become a showcase of how well-designed reforms can turn the situation around.But this example also serves as warning – others can just as quickly catch up. If struggling countries continue to pursue ambitious reforms, and Germany rests on its laurels, it could once again be this country left in the slow lane.So it also needs to tap new sources of growth, like professional services, that remain unreformed.Let me now conclude.The challenge avoiding false alternatives, and taking the hard decisions, is not a new one. Niccolo Machiavelli observed in the 16th century that,“There is nothing more difficult to carry out than to institute a new order of things. Because the reformer has for enemies all those who have profited under the old conditions and lukewarm defenders in those who may do well under the new.”[2]We at the ECB are no different: we also have structural problems to address. And since I am speaking at the “Women in European Business” conference, let me focus on one in particular: the underrepresentation of female staff in our management positions and governing bodies.For a very long time, I was personally not in favour of any kind of affirmative action, because I was convinced that qualified women would eventually make their way to the top. But I have come to realise that this is not the case – neither in the working environments I am familiar with, nor on a wider scale.I was struck when I heard that it will take more than 70 years to achieve gender-balance in the UK’s largest 100 companies if the current rate of change is maintained. [3]The ECB’s Executive Board recently discussed enhancing gender diversity in our management and decided that, from now on, we will not only talk about diversity – we will act. All studies show that the commitment from the top is key to bringing about change. The commitment is there – we want new measures and the board has asked its Human Resources department to provide these to us. Other international financial institutions like the IMF and the EIB as well as the European Commission are more advanced and have introduced gender targets, which define specific quantitative – albeit non-binding – goals for employing women at various levels. We think that we can learn from the experience of these institutions and that their targets may serve as a benchmark for us. This marks a significant change, especially in the generally rather conservative world of central banking. All change implies a challenge, especially for those at the top of the organisation. But leadership must be challenged to keep it relevant – which is another theme of this conference. The key issue is how, when challenged, it answers. The current concerns about where Europe is heading are a challenge to our leadership. They have to be properly answered. Not by resorting to populism or false alternatives – but by reaffirming, clearly and honestly, why the path we are taking is the right one. Thank you for your attention.[1]Barkbu, B., Rahman, J., Valdés, R., “Fostering Growth in Europe Now”, IMF Staff Discussion Note,. June 2012[2]Niccolò Machiavelli, The Prince, 1532[3]Equality and Human rights Commission, 2008.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",dear ms siebert dear mr leithner ladi gentlemen thank much invit speak women european busi confer organis deutsch bank topic year confer quest growth could scarc relev europ today audienc know better low growth environ pose serious challeng busi uncertainti futur drag confid barrier new invest caus bank cut back lend especi small mediums firm critic help growth rebound low growth deepli affect live ordinari peopl europ result mani frustrat even desper doubt whether european strategi deal crisi right one ask ever come ever cut auster right legitim ask power mass key theme confer democrat societi europ import choic futur countri monetari union requir proper public debat debat also need base substanc rage alon solv problem angri politician offici even justifi help citizen understand crisi peopl need present real choic face even mean take hard decis make sacrific offer alleg easi solut present fals altern abandon debat populist gambl longterm prosper societi today would like present view choic face europ expos myth misconcept european approach manag crisi concret want answer two question first altern current strategi real consequ second condemn lost decad find new sourc growth lift us crisi policymak sometim speak certain cours action without altern alternativlo say german cours true alway altern question whether superior especi assess like impact longerterm consequ let begin look altern know one pillar crisi respons europ consolid govern budget progress far good european commiss estim end year euro area whole budget deficit gdp progress also cost short term growth turn lower forecast unemploy risen steepli almost million peopl euro area current without job includ almost one everi four young peopl face hardship strategi reduc deficit come increas critic comment politician urg exit auster cage other claim continu cut deficit growth low policymak ignor evid even ideolog exit crisi say europ must engag urgent chang cours time less auster public money less reform let clear also concern high level unemploy would also like see stronger growth propos chang cours need think consequ respons policymak mean put simpli consequ stop cut deficit increas public debt feasibl sustain solut problem view answer first regardless merit strategi would work privat investor will financ higher borrow reason rate certain big especi countri whose debt alreadi high rise second illus think debt answer debt crisi recent research shown high public debt level euro area hamper growth serious negat effect start debt exceed gdp averag euro area public debt alreadi level almost gdp ad debt put us danger zone third strategi increas debt simpli push problem futur benefit current generat come expens futur generat higher borrow today mean higher interest payment tomorrow paid tax tomorrow citizen moreov today generat consum futur generat save get debt level back part new eu debt rule euro area countri legal bound start reduc public debt gdp give sens mean take exampl itali public debt almost gdp halv next generat abid debt limit around billion euro year goe debt servic annual budget spent educ infrastructur top futur generat face number hidden cost yet factor debt figur includ effect age societi unknown consequ chang climat take exampl germani european commiss project age report work age popul fall time agerel spend continu increas mean year year ever smaller number worker support ever larger social secur system word futur generat alreadi carri major burden fair increas debt today make heavier still economist maynard keyn famous dismiss longterm consider argument longrun re dead true children grandchildren ensur fiscal sound today repres voic current debat sum question benefit chang cours satisfi current situat altern avail wors mean place shortterm expedi longterm sustain opposit respons policymak citizen take decis great import futur direct ask ballot box cast vote make choic determin live also generat come deserv full pictur altern face citizen still right ask growth come lead second theme address today euro area condemn lost decad low growth high unemploy new sourc growth exploit get crisi answer depend govern truth option come growth new sourc growth tap even budget cut implement pillar european strategi enact deeproot econom reform increas potenti economi grow reform open market increas competit remov bureaucraci reform advanc innov encourag entrepreneurship help public administr actual serv public reform easi implement requir tough choic persever confront vest interest patienc effect becom visibl potenti huge give sens achiev recent research imf find euro area countri could boost gdp five year open market competit reform tax system could also lot support growth remov remain barrier singl market europ particular complet singl market servic european commiss estim implement servic direct cover activ make around eu gdp could reap addit gain billion euro eu gdp five ten year requir implement legisl alreadi agre higher growth benefit reform also contribut social fair oecd go growth report put doubl dividend structur reform comment criticis social consequ european strategi often forget element focus effect budget cut sometim fall hardest vulner group societi welldesign reform opposit effect fact creat opportun peopl margin societi let allud spain rigid twotier labour market protect insid mean young peopl flexibl contract bear burden econom downturn result almost current unemploy anoth countri administr tax collect weak lead enorm amount tax arrear result ordinari peopl tax salari pay make differ case lack reform lead unfair outcom structur reform could help toward fairer societi ultim structur reform winner outnumb potenti loser time messag get attent howev fall trap think struggl countri need take hard decis compet today within europ rest world sit back countri germani decad ago call sick man europ peopl wonder public germani save sinc countri becom showcas welldesign reform turn situat around exampl also serv warn other quick catch struggl countri continu pursu ambiti reform germani rest laurel could countri left slow lane also need tap new sourc growth like profession servic remain unreform let conclud challeng avoid fals altern take hard decis new one niccolo machiavelli observ th centuri noth difficult carri institut new order thing reform enemi profit old condit lukewarm defend may well new ecb differ also structur problem address sinc speak women european busi confer let focus one particular underrepresent femal staff manag posit govern bodi long time person favour kind affirm action convinc qualifi women would eventu make way top come realis case neither work environ familiar wider scale struck heard take year achiev genderbal uk largest compani current rate chang maintain ecb execut board recent discuss enhanc gender divers manag decid talk divers act studi show commit top key bring chang commit want new measur board ask human resourc depart provid us intern financi institut like imf eib well european commiss advanc introduc gender target defin specif quantit albeit nonbind goal employ women various level think learn experi institut target may serv benchmark us mark signific chang especi general rather conserv world central bank chang impli challeng especi top organis leadership must challeng keep relev anoth theme confer key issu challeng answer current concern europ head challeng leadership proper answer resort popul fals altern reaffirm clear honest path take right one thank attent barkbu b rahman j valdé r foster growth europ imf staff discuss note june niccolò machiavelli princ equal human right commiss reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en