Vítor Constâncio: Economic reforms: European and Chinese challenges,25-11-2010,European Central Bank,ECB,3108,"<p>Relations between China and Europe are currently closer than ever before. This is ultimately a result of the growing interdependence between these two partners and the ensuing need to address common policy challenges through cooperation in today’s global environment.The strength of the economic links between China and Europe is undeniable. In my capacity as a euro area central banker, let me provide some evidence pertaining to this vast region of Europe, which in around one month’s time will span 17 different countries. The euro area is, alongside the United States, the main destination for Chinese exports, with an export share of 15% in 2008. But it is equally impressive – when looking, in turn, at euro area exports – that euro area exports to China tripled between 2000 and 2009, at a time when the share of the United States in total euro area exports was decreasing from 17% to 12%. The pace of this development has been particularly striking during the financial crisis: China’s share of total euro area exports rose from 3.8% to 6.2% between the first quarter of 2007 and the second quarter of this year, increasing by an extraordinary 70% since the first quarter of 2009. It is also interesting to note that Chinese foreign direct investment in the euro area, while still at a relatively low level, has shown consistently strong growth since 2004. The people of Europe have now become used to the idea of some of their firms being owned by companies located in China.It is therefore no surprise that our countries have significant shared interests. The point I would like to make today is that our common strategic concerns pertain not only to the continuance of a bilateral and global free trade environment, but also to the pursuit of domestic models in terms of growth and economic governance that prove sustainable and do not exacerbate macroeconomic or financial stability vulnerabilities over time. This would place the close relationship between our two economies on a solid footing in the long term. Such relations must, in turn, be seen against the broader, multilateral background of the upgrading of the G20 in response to the financial crisis, which has been crucial in further involving all systemically important countries, including China, in international policy cooperation. In particular, the G20 Framework for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth is a promising means of fostering collective action at the global level. If this goal is to be achieved, the ECB considers it vital that all G20 members fully live up to the commitments made within the Framework. Against this backdrop, I will first discuss the policy challenges currently confronting euro area authorities and the responses that are being adopted. I will then talk about those factors which – both in my understanding and, as far as I can see, in the view of the Chinese authorities – make the pursuit of economic reforms a central objective in China, too.There has recently been a tendency among commentators to regard Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) as being in need of far-reaching reform. This view has been encouraged by the emergence of tensions in certain euro area sovereign debt markets in 2010, which has caused some observers to reappraise the prospects for the single currency.These criticisms stem from three challenges currently facing the euro area:first, the excessive debts and deficits in a number of member countries;second, the considerable divergence across the euro area in terms of competitiveness and member countries’ sizeable current account imbalances;third, the challenge of preventing and managing crises, given the lack of a clear euro area framework for this purpose.These challenges refocus attention on certain indispensable aspects of what it means to be part of a single currency area. The challenge of excessive public debts and deficits serves as a reminder of the need for countries in EMU to pursue sustainable fiscal policies. Fiscal sustainability is a must in a union with a centralised monetary policy, but decentralised fiscal policies, and a central bank which – for very good reasons – is prohibited by the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union from engaging in the monetary financing of public deficits. Moreover, fiscal policy has to be geared towards maintaining domestic demand in line with sustainable growth and price stability.The challenge of intra-euro area imbalances underscores the importance of countries keeping nominal price and cost developments in line with those of the euro area as a whole. Otherwise, losses in competitiveness will ensue which cannot be offset by the exchange rate or the single monetary policy, which by definition can only be geared towards price stability in the euro area as a whole. This also underscores the importance of avoiding unsustainable current account imbalances, which imply vulnerabilities such as excessive credit growth or dependence on external financing.The challenge of preventing and managing crises draws attention to the need for euro area countries to genuinely treat their economic policies as a “matter of common concern” – as they are obliged to by the Treaty – and exercise effective peer pressure. Intrusive mutual surveillance is a necessary precondition for participation in a highly integrated economic and financial area. As we have seen this year, a failure in terms of surveillance can quickly result in a crisis in a member country which – no matter how small the country – spills over to the rest of the area via cross-border holdings of that country’s sovereign debt and more general confidence effects.While these challenges are genuine and serious, I do not agree with the conclusions that some commentators have drawn. Such criticisms overlook two very important aspects of the euro area that tell a different story about its resilience. First, the euro has been successful, in its first 12 years, in many important areas which do not require reforms. The euro has brought stability, with inflation averaging 1.98% and inflation expectations remaining solidly anchored. The euro has facilitated economic integration, with financial integration increasing by around 25-30% in those EU countries that first adopted the euro and trade integration increasing by an average of 5-10% since 1999. Those countries that have remained more competitive have benefited significantly in terms of trade in view of the absence of exchange rate fluctuation. The advent of the euro has also been associated with the stronger correlation of business cycles and a reduction in the dispersion of annual inflation rates and real GDP growth rates across euro area countries. Indeed, nowadays such dispersion is comparable to the dispersion seen across the various US states. And the euro has established itself as the second international currency. Given these achievements, it would be distressing to imagine a world without the euro. What would have happened to individual euro area economies during the deepest economic and financial crisis in decades? Second, the major efforts that are already being made to address the root causes of the euro area’s challenges are sometimes overlooked. Euro area countries are currently leading the way in prioritising a swift return to fiscal consolidation, which will have important confidence effects. The IMF currently predicts that the euro area’s aggregate fiscal deficit will be 5.1% of GDP next year. This compares with 9.7% of GDP in the United States, 8.1% of GDP in the United Kingdom and 8.9% of GDP in Japan.  The EU is also introducing a reinforced economic governance framework which will place our community on a more stable footing in the future.  EU governments have agreed to put in place stronger procedures for the surveillance of fiscal policies, paying more attention to government debt levels and creating stronger incentives, such as sanctions, to ensure compliance with recommendations. Sanctions for excessive deficits will be imposed much earlier than before. Progress is being made in the improvement of national fiscal rules and frameworks and government finance statistics, which will help to enshrine responsible fiscal governance in national law. Governments are addressing the issue of imbalances by pursuing structural reforms as part of the “Europe 2020” initiative and setting up a new macroeconomic surveillance framework, with an alert mechanism based on scoreboard indicators that should identify and correct macroeconomic imbalances and vulnerabilities at an early stage. As imbalances are more detrimental in a single currency area, there is a stronger enforcement framework for euro area countries, backed by non-financial sanctions. Leaders of euro area countries have committed themselves to setting up a permanent crisis management mechanism for the euro area when the current stability facility expires in June 2013, which should provide a more predictable framework for steering the single currency through crises. Seen in combination with the steps being taken to improve crisis prevention through the planned reform of fiscal and macroeconomic governance, there are grounds for confidence in the euro area’s ability to weather difficult periods in the future.That said, there are still areas of that reformed governance framework where the ECB would like to see further progress. We would like to see greater automaticity in the implementation of fiscal surveillance procedures. We would also like to see stronger sanctions, such as financial sanctions, under the macroeconomic surveillance procedure. This procedure should concentrate firmly on euro area countries experiencing sustained competitiveness losses and large current account deficits. It should be based on transparent and effective trigger mechanisms and give its assessments and recommendations a high degree of publicity at all stages of the surveillance process. The euro area is undeniably facing many challenges. But these challenges do not invalidate our achievements to date or the steps that are being taken to reform economic governance and address them at the source. I am confident that euro area authorities will do whatever is necessary to steer the single currency through its current difficulties, ensuring its future stability.Turning to China, I very much welcome the fact that the Chinese authorities have placed the gradual rebalancing of growth at the heart of their policy objectives. The 12th five-year plan, due to be finalised in March next year, testifies to these efforts, which should not be seen in isolation, but as part of the broader efforts made by systemically relevant G20 members with a view to rebalancing their economies. In Pittsburgh last year, G20 members with significant external deficits pledged to implement policies to support private saving and/or embark on fiscal consolidation, while members with significant external surpluses committed themselves to strengthening their domestic sources of growth, as well as allowing greater flexibility in their exchange rate policies, as decided in Toronto. One year later, in Seoul a few days ago, G20 leaders pledged to “pursue the full range of policies conducive to reduc[ing] excessive imbalances”, the “timely identification” of which will be facilitated by “indicative guidelines to be agreed by […] Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors” in the first half of 2011.It is against this backdrop that we have to look at the Chinese growth model. This model began three decades ago, when the country embarked upon a courageous process of reforms, and relies upon a large pool of domestic savings and cheap labour, with growth being driven mainly by investment and low-cost exports. In this context, China’s macroeconomic policy framework is built on three mutually consistent pillars: a managed exchange rate; a closed capital account; and the pursuit of some degree of monetary policy autonomy, mainly via administrative measures. The achievements of this model over the past three decades are unquestionable. First, China’s output has grown by an average of around 10% per year since those economic reforms began in 1978, with the economy showing remarkable resilience even during the recent global financial crisis. In terms of levels, China’s GDP now accounts for less than 40% of US GDP in market exchange rate terms, but around two-thirds of it in terms of purchasing power parity. Looking ahead, some observers expect China to surpass the United States as the world’s largest economy as early as 2020. Strong and sustained economic growth has fuelled an eightfold rise in per capita income. And as a result, the poverty rate – the percentage of the population that has an income of less than USD 1.25 per day – has declined to less than 16%, down from 85% when the reforms began. In other words, China has managed to lift more than 600 million people out of poverty in the last three decades.China’s export development is equally outstanding. It has increased its world market share from less than 1% in 1980 to 8% today, and in 2009 it dethroned Germany as the world’s largest exporter. However, the apparent successes and resilience of the Chinese economic model do not necessarily mean that this model will prove equally sustainable over, say, the next 15 years. Indeed, it is interesting to note that some of the major long-term factors that have been driving China’s strong economic performance may reach a turning point in the not too distant future. These are (i) the continuous growth of demand for Chinese exports, (ii) favourable demographic developments, and (iii) the sustained accumulation of physical capital. As regards the first factor, it seems unlikely that China’s export growth can continue to persistently exceed 15% per year, given projected domestic demand trends in advanced economies. Also, historical experience with export-led economies suggests that there are limits to the process of gaining market share. The turning point on the demographic side looks to be further off, but is even more critical. China’s dependency ratio – the ratio of people of non-working age to people of working age – is expected to start rising again by 2015 at the latest. This means that the number of people who cannot save and can only consume – the youngest and oldest sections of the population – will increase. This, coupled with the progressive drying-up of labour supply from the agricultural sector, will reduce the saving rate and the resulting domestic funding of investment. It will probably also bring about wage increases that impinge upon the cost competitiveness of Chinese exports. Finally, historical experience with industrialised economies also tells us that the marginal return on capital diminishes as countries grow richer and accumulate more capital per worker. This means that in China a transition is needed from an economy driven by growth in factor inputs to one driven by efficiency and productivity improvements. The declines in these long-term structural factors are a fundamental reason why economic reforms are also very important in China, even if in the short run these developments may not result in immediate challenges to the long-standing economic model. The Chinese authorities have, however, identified other, partly related developments – the emergence of domestic and external imbalances – as key factors calling for more urgent reforms.First, the share of private consumption in GDP has declined further. In the first nine months of 2010 the contribution made by consumption to GDP growth fell to 34%, down from the pre‑crisis average of 39%, while the contribution of investment picked up to stand at 59% (against a pre-crisis average of 49%). Second, overcapacity in some segments of the economy and the limited efficiency of capital – especially in the public sector – have been additional sources of concern. More than half of the RMB 4 trillion stimulus enacted during the financial crisis has resulted in investment in public infrastructure, which has further increased the already sizeable role played by the public sector in the economy. Third, the share of the service sector in GDP has remained small. Given that the service sector is considered to be the most labour-intensive of the three major sectors, its underdevelopment has had negative implications for overall employment. Fourth, income inequality has been on the rise. Average urban income is now three times higher than average rural income. And the income gap between urban households with high incomes and those with low incomes has also been increasing. Of course, given the complexity of the structural reforms involved, China cannot become a consumption economy overnight. This will take time. And for this very reason it is important to start now in order to ensure that the transition process is as smooth as possible. However, the benefits of these structural reforms could be substantial. To give you an idea of just how substantial, I would like to quote a recent study by the Asian Development Bank [1]. It estimates that without policy reforms China’s real annual GDP growth will slow to an average of 5.5% for the period 2010-30 as a result of less favourable developments in the structural factors I have just described, namely export demand, demographics and capital accumulation. According to the findings of the ADB study, policy improvements in areas such as education, research and property rights could instead increase GDP growth by at least 1 percentage point over that period.Chinese measures to achieve more balanced growth have also included, over the past five years, very important exchange rate reforms. Both in July 2005 and in June 2010, the ECB and other euro area authorities publicly welcomed China’s moves towards a more flexible exchange rate regime. The potential for exchange rate adjustment implied by these decisions needs to be further exploited. Given the importance of China’s role in the global economy, further flexibility of the renminbi would be another element conducive to more balanced growth. Greater exchange rate flexibility could help in achieving the objective of improving economic efficiency and market-based resource allocation. It would allow greater control over domestic monetary policy and help to adjust the policy stance in line with GDP growth in a timely manner in order to prevent the emergence of inflationary and asset price pressures. * * * * *In conclusion, I would like to emphasise once again that, given the global nature of the challenges at stake, all major economies should do their part by striving to implement the policy measures collectively agreed in order to rebalance global growth patterns. Multilateral cooperation is not the easiest way forward. However, in the absence of cooperative policy action, the pain that purely market-driven adjustment would bring about in the transition phase could prove too severe for us to simply dismiss this course of action today. Given their size and importance, Europe and China both have a key role to play in the global resolution of the crisis. It is important to understand that a stronger, more sustainable and balanced global economy – which is in all our interests – can only be achieved if policy‑makers from all countries work together. We still cannot be sure that the G20 Framework will be implemented effectively. It is therefore paramount that the systemically most relevant countries fully live up to the commitments made in Pittsburgh, Toronto and Seoul.[1]Lee, J.W. and Hong, K., “Economic Growth in Asia: Determinants and Prospects”, ADB Economics Working Paper Series, No 220, Economics and Research Department, Asian Development Bank, Manila, 2010 (forthcoming).Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",relat china europ current closer ever ultim result grow interdepend two partner ensu need address common polici challeng cooper today global environ strength econom link china europ undeni capac euro area central banker let provid evid pertain vast region europ around one month time span differ countri euro area alongsid unit state main destin chines export export share equal impress look turn euro area export euro area export china tripl time share unit state total euro area export decreas pace develop particular strike financi crisi china share total euro area export rose first quarter second quarter year increas extraordinari sinc first quarter also interest note chines foreign direct invest euro area still relat low level shown consist strong growth sinc peopl europ becom use idea firm own compani locat china therefor surpris countri signific share interest point would like make today common strateg concern pertain continu bilater global free trade environ also pursuit domest model term growth econom govern prove sustain exacerb macroeconom financi stabil vulner time would place close relationship two economi solid foot long term relat must turn seen broader multilater background upgrad g respons financi crisi crucial involv system import countri includ china intern polici cooper particular g framework strong sustain balanc growth promis mean foster collect action global level goal achiev ecb consid vital g member fulli live commit made within framework backdrop first discuss polici challeng current confront euro area author respons adopt talk factor understand far see view chines author make pursuit econom reform central object china recent tendenc among comment regard econom monetari union emu need farreach reform view encourag emerg tension certain euro area sovereign debt market caus observ reapprais prospect singl currenc critic stem three challeng current face euro area first excess debt deficit number member countri second consider diverg across euro area term competit member countri sizeabl current account imbal third challeng prevent manag crise given lack clear euro area framework purpos challeng refocus attent certain indispens aspect mean part singl currenc area challeng excess public debt deficit serv remind need countri emu pursu sustain fiscal polici fiscal sustain must union centralis monetari polici decentralis fiscal polici central bank good reason prohibit treati function european union engag monetari financ public deficit moreov fiscal polici gear toward maintain domest demand line sustain growth price stabil challeng intraeuro area imbal underscor import countri keep nomin price cost develop line euro area whole otherwis loss competit ensu cannot offset exchang rate singl monetari polici definit gear toward price stabil euro area whole also underscor import avoid unsustain current account imbal impli vulner excess credit growth depend extern financ challeng prevent manag crise draw attent need euro area countri genuin treat econom polici matter common concern oblig treati exercis effect peer pressur intrus mutual surveil necessari precondit particip high integr econom financi area seen year failur term surveil quick result crisi member countri matter small countri spill rest area via crossbord hold countri sovereign debt general confid effect challeng genuin serious agre conclus comment drawn critic overlook two import aspect euro area tell differ stori resili first euro success first year mani import area requir reform euro brought stabil inflat averag inflat expect remain solid anchor euro facilit econom integr financi integr increas around eu countri first adopt euro trade integr increas averag sinc countri remain competit benefit signific term trade view absenc exchang rate fluctuat advent euro also associ stronger correl busi cycl reduct dispers annual inflat rate real gdp growth rate across euro area countri inde nowaday dispers compar dispers seen across various us state euro establish second intern currenc given achiev would distress imagin world without euro would happen individu euro area economi deepest econom financi crisi decad second major effort alreadi made address root caus euro area challeng sometim overlook euro area countri current lead way prioritis swift return fiscal consolid import confid effect imf current predict euro area aggreg fiscal deficit gdp next year compar gdp unit state gdp unit kingdom gdp japan eu also introduc reinforc econom govern framework place communiti stabl foot futur eu govern agre put place stronger procedur surveil fiscal polici pay attent govern debt level creat stronger incent sanction ensur complianc recommend sanction excess deficit impos much earlier progress made improv nation fiscal rule framework govern financ statist help enshrin respons fiscal govern nation law govern address issu imbal pursu structur reform part europ initi set new macroeconom surveil framework alert mechan base scoreboard indic identifi correct macroeconom imbal vulner earli stage imbal detriment singl currenc area stronger enforc framework euro area countri back nonfinanci sanction leader euro area countri commit set perman crisi manag mechan euro area current stabil facil expir june provid predict framework steer singl currenc crise seen combin step taken improv crisi prevent plan reform fiscal macroeconom govern ground confid euro area abil weather difficult period futur said still area reform govern framework ecb would like see progress would like see greater automat implement fiscal surveil procedur would also like see stronger sanction financi sanction macroeconom surveil procedur procedur concentr firm euro area countri experienc sustain competit loss larg current account deficit base transpar effect trigger mechan give assess recommend high degre public stage surveil process euro area undeni face mani challeng challeng invalid achiev date step taken reform econom govern address sourc confid euro area author whatev necessari steer singl currenc current difficulti ensur futur stabil turn china much welcom fact chines author place gradual rebalanc growth heart polici object th fiveyear plan due finalis march next year testifi effort seen isol part broader effort made system relev g member view rebalanc economi pittsburgh last year g member signific extern deficit pledg implement polici support privat save andor embark fiscal consolid member signific extern surplus commit strengthen domest sourc growth well allow greater flexibl exchang rate polici decid toronto one year later seoul day ago g leader pledg pursu full rang polici conduc reduc ing excess imbal time identif facilit indic guidelin agre financ minist central bank governor first half backdrop look chines growth model model began three decad ago countri embark upon courag process reform reli upon larg pool domest save cheap labour growth driven main invest lowcost export context china macroeconom polici framework built three mutual consist pillar manag exchang rate close capit account pursuit degre monetari polici autonomi main via administr measur achiev model past three decad unquestion first china output grown averag around per year sinc econom reform began economi show remark resili even recent global financi crisi term level china gdp account less us gdp market exchang rate term around twothird term purchas power pariti look ahead observ expect china surpass unit state world largest economi earli strong sustain econom growth fuell eightfold rise per capita incom result poverti rate percentag popul incom less usd per day declin less reform began word china manag lift million peopl poverti last three decad china export develop equal outstand increas world market share less today dethron germani world largest export howev appar success resili chines econom model necessarili mean model prove equal sustain say next year inde interest note major longterm factor drive china strong econom perform may reach turn point distant futur continu growth demand chines export ii favour demograph develop iii sustain accumul physic capit regard first factor seem unlik china export growth continu persist exceed per year given project domest demand trend advanc economi also histor experi exportl economi suggest limit process gain market share turn point demograph side look even critic china depend ratio ratio peopl nonwork age peopl work age expect start rise latest mean number peopl cannot save consum youngest oldest section popul increas coupl progress dryingup labour suppli agricultur sector reduc save rate result domest fund invest probabl also bring wage increas imping upon cost competit chines export final histor experi industrialis economi also tell us margin return capit diminish countri grow richer accumul capit per worker mean china transit need economi driven growth factor input one driven effici product improv declin longterm structur factor fundament reason econom reform also import china even short run develop may result immedi challeng longstand econom model chines author howev identifi part relat develop emerg domest extern imbal key factor call urgent reform first share privat consumpt gdp declin first nine month contribut made consumpt gdp growth fell pre crisi averag contribut invest pick stand precrisi averag second overcapac segment economi limit effici capit especi public sector addit sourc concern half rmb trillion stimulus enact financi crisi result invest public infrastructur increas alreadi sizeabl role play public sector economi third share servic sector gdp remain small given servic sector consid labourintens three major sector underdevelop negat implic overal employ fourth incom inequ rise averag urban incom three time higher averag rural incom incom gap urban household high incom low incom also increas cours given complex structur reform involv china cannot becom consumpt economi overnight take time reason import start order ensur transit process smooth possibl howev benefit structur reform could substanti give idea substanti would like quot recent studi asian develop bank estim without polici reform china real annual gdp growth slow averag period result less favour develop structur factor describ name export demand demograph capit accumul accord find adb studi polici improv area educ research properti right could instead increas gdp growth least percentag point period chines measur achiev balanc growth also includ past five year import exchang rate reform juli june ecb euro area author public welcom china move toward flexibl exchang rate regim potenti exchang rate adjust impli decis need exploit given import china role global economi flexibl renminbi would anoth element conduc balanc growth greater exchang rate flexibl could help achiev object improv econom effici marketbas resourc alloc would allow greater control domest monetari polici help adjust polici stanc line gdp growth time manner order prevent emerg inflationari asset price pressur conclus would like emphasis given global natur challeng stake major economi part strive implement polici measur collect agre order rebal global growth pattern multilater cooper easiest way forward howev absenc cooper polici action pain pure marketdriven adjust would bring transit phase could prove sever us simpli dismiss cours action today given size import europ china key role play global resolut crisi import understand stronger sustain balanc global economi interest achiev polici maker countri work togeth still cannot sure g framework implement effect therefor paramount system relev countri fulli live commit made pittsburgh toronto seoul lee j w hong k econom growth asia determin prospect adb econom work paper seri econom research depart asian develop bank manila forthcom reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en