Benoît Cœuré: Collateral scarcity – a gone or a going concern?,01-10-2012,European Central Bank,ECB,3048,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen, [1] It is a great pleasure for me to speak here today at this conference, kindly hosted by De Nederlandsche Bank.The use of collateral is as old as economic transactions, and is mentioned in the Bible:“If thou at all take thy neighbour's raiment to pledge, thou shalt deliver it unto him by that the sun goeth down: For that [is] his covering only, it [is] his raiment for his skin: wherein shall he sleep?” [2]The importance of collateral in the economy may have been neglected in earlier academic work, but has been well recognised lately. In his seminal work [3] on the topic John Geanakoplos says that:“…the main business of Wall Street is to help people make and keep promises. Over time, as more people have been included in the process, punishment and reputation have been replaced by collateral. This enabled a proliferation of promises, but has led to a scarcity of collateral. The ensuing efforts of Wall Street, in conjunction, of course, with the government and in particular the courts and the tax code, to stretch the available collateral has significant and surprising effects on the working of the economy, including the cyclical or volatile behavior of prices…”Today, in my opening remarks I would like to consider one issue regarding collateral that was mentioned in that quote, namely the scarcity of eligible collateral.One reason that makes collateral scarce is that the supply of “sound” collateral is in principle limited. Collateral is sound if it guarantees a quasi-certain stream of revenues. Indeed if investors’ trust in the creditworthiness of assets decreases, then the amount of collateral gauged sound reduces. During the crisis there has been a widespread flight to quality, out of certain asset classes, which used to be considered sound.Collateral scarcity is a somewhat more topical issue in the euro area than elsewhere. It can affect the functioning and stability of the financial system in several ways, possibly resulting in: i) persistent changes in the relative cost of different forms of bank funding, a phenomenon that we have observed for some time; ii) changes in bank balance sheets with implications on lending behaviour; and iii) a greater sensitivity of financing conditions to changes in the value of collateral assets. [4] That said, let me emphasise upfront that there is a difference between scarcity and shortage. Scarcity is a fact and not a problem per se. Allocating scarce resources through prices is the way our economies work. The problem would be a shortage of collateral and/or an impaired price mechanism. I will argue that is not the case in the euro area, where there is no aggregate shortage of collateral; local tensions may arise but they are being addressed in various ways. In this context, the Eurosystem has taken a number of measures to make the supply of collateral assets more elastic, which ultimately should help a smooth transmission of monetary policy impulses, and support financial stability.But first, allow me to say a few words on the collateral framework of the Eurosystem, and how it is developing, as this is relevant when discussing collateral scarcity.As you know, the Eurosystem has always implemented a “broad” collateral framework, i.e. it has chosen to accept a broad range of asset types as collateral in its credit operations reflecting: i) the large number of, and differences among, its eligible counterparties, ii) the heterogeneity of financial markets in Europe, in particular in the early times of EMU, and iii) the differences in business models of European banks. Despite this broad pool of collateral accepted even in normal times, the collateral framework is by no means static in nature. In fact, the Eurosystem has made a considerable number of amendments to its framework for conducting monetary policy, including an extension of collateral eligibility by accepting more asset types and reducing rating thresholds both in the aftermath of the Lehman default and, more recently, in response to the sovereign crisis.What are the guiding principles of our collateral framework and what factors drive amendments to it? First, in accordance with the Statute of the ESCB and the ECB, the collateral accepted by the Eurosystem in all credit operations must be “adequate”. In determining this “adequacy”, the Eurosystem has to achieve two goals. The first goal is to provide the necessary funding to the banking sector which, in turn, requires that sufficient quantities of eligible collateral be available on the balance sheet of counterparties. The second goal is the integrity of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet, which requires that risks in lending to banks be kept under control. To achieve this goal the Eurosystem applies a set of eligibility criteria for collateral and implements appropriate risk mitigating measures. The principle underlying these measures is the effort to equalise the “post-mitigation risk” of any eligible asset, i.e. the remaining risk after the implementation of risk control measures, while being aware that we can never perfectly achieve this result. This would mean, for example, that by applying a haircut of 0.5% to a Treasury bill, we achieve the same protection as when we apply a haircut of 60% or more to a 10-year bank loan, when both these assets are accepted as collateral in central bank operations.  The second guiding principle is that the Eurosystem should closely follow and respond to market developments, financial innovation and counterparties’ behaviour. To do so, the Eurosystem must remain ready to adapt its framework to such developments at any time. This may require changes in the eligibility criteria, including the acceptance of additional asset classes or rejection of existing asset classes, or adjustments in the risk control and valuation framework.There are several reasons why central banks may need to adopt a broad collateral framework, particularly in a crisis, and to have it broader relative to the interbank repo collateral set. First, the role of a central bank as a backstop facility avoids a worsening crisis of confidence, i.e. it avoids a negative feedback loop-of-liquidity crisis. Second, a central bank is the only player that never has liquidity constraints. Therefore, in case of counterparty default, the central bank has ample time to liquidate collateral and await mean reversion of values. Third, central banks can impose haircuts that protect them from adverse scenarios in the collateral liquidation process, as they are considered risk-free. For these reasons, it makes economic sense that, in a liquidity crisis, central banks continue to accept what is no longer accepted in the interbank market. They nevertheless should still act with prudence. This means adequate risk protection, careful monitoring of submitted collateral and adjusted eligibility criteria if necessary.Collateral scarcity may be driven by regulatory changes but also by increased risk aversion and counterparty risk. We see the move from unsecured to secured transactions on several layers, for example in money markets, the longer-term wholesale funding markets, in an increased use of CCPs as mandated by the G-20, and a larger recourse to central bank liquidity. This move, together with asset purchase programmes by central banks, is likely to increase the demand for high-quality assets. However, while collateral scarcity has become a concern for many euro area banks, this does not seem to be the case in other regions.The average amount of eligible collateral for Eurosystem liquidity operations was €14.3 trillion during the second quarter of this year. However, only €2.5 trillion was put forward as collateral [5] by counterparties to be used in our liquidity operations that came to an average outstanding amount of around €1.3 trillion (see Chart 1). This shows that, despite the fears of collateral scarcity in the euro area, there is some leeway in collateral availability. Naturally, this aggregate view masks country differences. Indeed, the concerns about collateral scarcity is characterised by heterogeneity in the euro area since some credit institutions have a sufficient collateral pool, while others have less leeway. Not surprisingly, the latter are usually located in those Member States that are hit particularly hard by the sovereign debt and banking crisis. To some degree, the composition of assets used as collateral in Eurosystem liquidity operations mirrors the state of the financial markets (see Chart 2). First, as a result of the dried-up market activity in the securitisation market starting in late 2007, the share of ABSs as collateral quickly increased, from around 16% in 2007 to 28% the following year, indicating that such securitisation transactions were increasingly being held on the balance sheet of the originator bank and pledged as collateral with the central bank. Second, non-marketable assets and above all, credit claims (i.e. normal bank loans) have become the largest single asset class in our collateral portfolio. Third, uncovered bank bonds constituted the largest marketable asset type in 2009, mostly in non-guaranteed forms. However, the absolute amounts and the share started to decline sharply thereafter, due to subdued issuance volumes, increased risk aversion and concerns about the counterparty risk. In addition to the decrease in issuance, downgrades of banks have rendered a large part of this collateral non-eligible for Eurosystem operations. As a result, guaranteed unsecured bank bonds now dominate non-guaranteed bank bonds. Finally, due to the implementation of the two 36- month refinancing operations conducted in December 2011 and February 2012, posted collateral in general increased, and in particular the use of covered bank bonds, which has lately become the largest marketable asset type in our collateral framework.It is equally important to analyse whether the observed scarcity of collateral in some regions follows a cyclical or a structural pattern. If it is cyclical it is mainly the result of the prevailing uncertainties in the markets and the perceived heightened counterparty risk that leads market participants to move from unsecured to secured funding, thus increasing their needs for collateral. Such moves could in principle be reversible, once confidence in banks’ resilience improves again. It has been argued however that a continued decline in, or even disappearance of, unsecured funding could have permanent effects on the balance sheet structure of banks. So, although central banks may have taken a number of measures to address the current stress on banks’ balance sheets (enlarging the collateral framework, purchasing assets, extending longer term liquidity, implementing non-recourse repos or swapping them with more liquid assets), these measures can be rolled back or discontinued as soon as the crisis subsides.A structural change in the demand for collateral, on the other hand, would be more the result of a series of regulatory changes (such as the liquidity coverage ratio under Basel III, regulatory changes on derivatives trading, the proposed capital charges in Solvency II for insurers, making it more attractive to hold covered bonds, and the Dodd-Frank Act) as well as a structural move away from unsecured towards secured funding arrangements. It would be of a permanent nature. This may warrant changes to central banks’ eligibility criteria for collateral to prevent central bank operations adding to the overall demand and competition for high-quality and liquid collateral for banks. Thus, central banks would need to consider extending collateral eligibility beyond these demanded assets. In fact, central banks are not subject to liquidity risk in their national currency, implying that they could choose to accept high-quality assets, but not necessarily liquid assets. In any case, the optimal choice of eligible assets for a central bank would be the one minimising cost for the whole financial system, taking into account the need to protect its own balance sheet to ensure its independence and maintain confidence in the currency.In general, to increase access to available collateral, for use in central banks operations and in private repo markets, the three typical medium to long-term wholesale funding sources need to function properly, adding value to both issuers and investors. During the crisis, the importance of being able to have recourse to the three sources of funds (secured, unsecured and securitisation) was confirmed. Indeed, the force of diversification works fully on the liability side. This is due to the fact that each type of security slices risk in a different way. This factor makes these three markets for long-term instruments act as complements rather than substitutes. This may be of particular relevance to the ABSs, since unlike covered bonds, they are based on an extremely versatile underlying pool of assets, and therefore the underlying economic sector that it is funding. This makes it somewhat different to other secured assets, for example, covered bonds. Maintenance work is ongoing especially in respect of the covered bond and the ABS market segments, which is indeed a welcome move.But let me finally offer you some potential policy responses to mitigate or to address the negative effects of collateral scarcity, and some forward-looking thoughts. As regards the supply of collateral assets by financial institutions, the Eurosystem has taken several steps to make it more elastic by encouraging the creation of new assets or making it easier to mobilise existing ones. These steps have also contributed to restore the impaired monetary policy transmission mechanism. Let me list five of them here. i) its interventions in support of the covered bond markets through the two Covered Bond Purchase Programmes (CBPPs), aiming at reactivating the primary market. Both programmes had the objective of easing funding conditions and encouraging institutions to maintain or expand lending to their clients, thereby contributing to the Eurosystem’s role in supporting the functioning of financial markets. By performing this catalytic function, the first purchase programme was very successful in restarting activity in primary covered bond markets, and thus creating private collateral of good quality;ii) lowering the minimum rating requirements at issuance for specific ABSs and allowing the use of additional credit claims, and iii) leading or acting as a catalyst in efforts to improve financial market conditions and to increase transparency and standardisation in some market segments such as the Prime Collateralised Securities (PCS) initiative in the ABS market, our own loan-level data requirements for ABSs, and the covered bond label initiative, initiated by the European Covered Bond Council. A common objective for these market-led initiatives is to restore confidence among investors in these market segments, and to re-introduce them as sustainable funding tools for banks. We would be happy to engage in further initiatives to foster market functioning and the creation of good and fairly safe assets that could be used in various collateral systems. In this regard I take the opportunity to refer to a fourth initiative which is currently being worked on by the Eurosystem.iv) A fourth initiative is the implementation of cross-border triparty collateral management services within the Eurosystem’s collateral framework. Today, these services are only available to a limited number of Eurosystem counterparties in a small number of countries (Germany, Luxembourg, France and very recently, Italy). In 2014 however, the Eurosystem will go-live with the support of cross-border use of triparty collateral management services via the Correspondent Central Banking Model (CCBM), thereby making them equally available to all euro area counterparties. While triparty services do not increase the availability of collateral as such, they allow for a considerably more efficient delivery of collateral to the Eurosystem, in turn allowing counterparties to optimise the use of their collateral assets with central banks and in the market. To enhance this process even further, the Eurosystem is also cooperating with the market to achieve interoperability between the different triparty offerings.v) In addition, the Governing Council of the ECB decided on 6 September to widen its collateral framework to accept marketable assets denominated in foreign currencies. In fact, looking beyond this non-standard and temporary measure, it is a moot point whether these types of collateral denominated in internationally accepted currencies and stemming from efficient financial systems should be allowed on a longer-term basis, in particular if collateral becomes scarce across several regions. More generally, some studies have highlighted the relative scarcity of high-quality financial assets. In particular, while advanced economies are able to generate relatively safe assets which appeal to international investors, emerging market economies are less able to do so. [6] In this context, fostering the international role of the currencies of some emerging economies could help the creation of safe, liquid and internationally accepted transaction instruments. While the positive aspects of accepting foreign-denominated collateral are fairly clear in terms of collateral availability for counterparties and for monetary policy, payment systems and financial stability, several challenges nevertheless emerge, such as legal complications, exchange rate risks and operational risks, as pointed out in a study by our host [7].Last but not least, in order for banks to attract investors to the unsecured bank funding market as well, confidence in the euro area must be restored. Through the restoration of fiscal discipline and implementation of structural reforms, euro area sovereign debt will be viewed once again as risk-free and thus contribute to a collateral supply of good quality. In addition, in the last couple of years we have also made significant progress regarding the institutional framework, with the establishment of the EFSF, the launching of the ESM, the approval of the “six-pack” legislation and of the fiscal compact, and the steps towards a banking union including the single supervisory mechanism. But let me emphasise that the only fundamental way to overcome collateral scarcity is to ensure private and public de-leveraging as well as sustainable growth. It is growth that generates sound assets, i.e. securities which guarantee a high likelihood stream of revenues.Thank you for your attention.[1]I would like to thank Pontus Aberg for his contribution to the speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions expressed herein.[2]Exodus 22:26-27, King James’ Bible.[3]Geneakoplos, J, “Promises, Promises,” in W. B. Arthur, S. Durlauf, and D. Lane, eds., The Economy as an Evolving Complex System, II, Addison-Wesley, Reading MA, 1997, pp. 285–320.[4]On collateral scarcity, see, for instance, Levels A. and J. Capel: ""Is collateral becoming scarce? Evidence from the euro area"", DNB Occasional Studies, Vol. 10, No. 1, 2012. [5]This figure includes the haircuts applied by the Eurosystem. [6]See, for instance, Caballero, R. J. (2006), “On the Macroeconomics of Asset Shortages”, NBER Working Paper No 12753; Caballero, R. J., E. Farhi, and P. O. Gourinchas “An Equilibrium Model of ‘Global Imbalances’ and Low Interest Rates”, American Economic Review 2008, 98:1, pp. 358-393.[7]Capel, J. “How does cross-border collateral affect a country’s central bank and prudential supervisor?”, DNB Occasional Studies, Vol. 7/No. 1. 2009.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur speak today confer kind host de nederlandsch bank use collater old econom transact mention bibl thou take thi neighbour raiment pledg thou shalt deliv unto sun goeth cover raiment skin wherein shall sleep import collater economi may neglect earlier academ work well recognis late semin work topic geanakoplo say main busi wall street help peopl make keep promis time peopl includ process punish reput replac collater enabl prolifer promis led scarciti collater ensu effort wall street conjunct cours govern particular court tax code stretch avail collater signific surpris effect work economi includ cyclic volatil behavior price today open remark would like consid one issu regard collater mention quot name scarciti elig collater one reason make collater scarc suppli sound collater principl limit collater sound guarante quasicertain stream revenu inde investor trust creditworthi asset decreas amount collater gaug sound reduc crisi widespread flight qualiti certain asset class use consid sound collater scarciti somewhat topic issu euro area elsewher affect function stabil financi system sever way possibl result persist chang relat cost differ form bank fund phenomenon observ time ii chang bank balanc sheet implic lend behaviour iii greater sensit financ condit chang valu collater asset said let emphasis upfront differ scarciti shortag scarciti fact problem per se alloc scarc resourc price way economi work problem would shortag collater andor impair price mechan argu case euro area aggreg shortag collater local tension may aris address various way context eurosystem taken number measur make suppli collater asset elast ultim help smooth transmiss monetari polici impuls support financi stabil first allow say word collater framework eurosystem develop relev discuss collater scarciti know eurosystem alway implement broad collater framework e chosen accept broad rang asset type collater credit oper reflect larg number differ among elig counterparti ii heterogen financi market europ particular earli time emu iii differ busi model european bank despit broad pool collater accept even normal time collater framework mean static natur fact eurosystem made consider number amend framework conduct monetari polici includ extens collater elig accept asset type reduc rate threshold aftermath lehman default recent respons sovereign crisi guid principl collater framework factor drive amend first accord statut escb ecb collater accept eurosystem credit oper must adequ determin adequaci eurosystem achiev two goal first goal provid necessari fund bank sector turn requir suffici quantiti elig collater avail balanc sheet counterparti second goal integr eurosystem balanc sheet requir risk lend bank kept control achiev goal eurosystem appli set elig criteria collater implement appropri risk mitig measur principl under measur effort equalis postmitig risk elig asset e remain risk implement risk control measur awar never perfect achiev result would mean exampl appli haircut treasuri bill achiev protect appli haircut year bank loan asset accept collater central bank oper second guid principl eurosystem close follow respond market develop financi innov counterparti behaviour eurosystem must remain readi adapt framework develop time may requir chang elig criteria includ accept addit asset class reject exist asset class adjust risk control valuat framework sever reason central bank may need adopt broad collater framework particular crisi broader relat interbank repo collater set first role central bank backstop facil avoid worsen crisi confid e avoid negat feedback loopofliquid crisi second central bank player never liquid constraint therefor case counterparti default central bank ampl time liquid collater await mean revers valu third central bank impos haircut protect advers scenario collater liquid process consid riskfre reason make econom sens liquid crisi central bank continu accept longer accept interbank market nevertheless still act prudenc mean adequ risk protect care monitor submit collater adjust elig criteria necessari collater scarciti may driven regulatori chang also increas risk avers counterparti risk see move unsecur secur transact sever layer exampl money market longerterm wholesal fund market increas use ccps mandat g larger recours central bank liquid move togeth asset purchas programm central bank like increas demand highqual asset howev collater scarciti becom concern mani euro area bank seem case region averag amount elig collater eurosystem liquid oper trillion second quarter year howev trillion put forward collater counterparti use liquid oper came averag outstand amount around trillion see chart show despit fear collater scarciti euro area leeway collater avail natur aggreg view mask countri differ inde concern collater scarciti characteris heterogen euro area sinc credit institut suffici collater pool other less leeway surpris latter usual locat member state hit particular hard sovereign debt bank crisi degre composit asset use collater eurosystem liquid oper mirror state financi market see chart first result driedup market activ securitis market start late share abss collater quick increas around follow year indic securitis transact increas held balanc sheet origin bank pledg collater central bank second nonmarket asset credit claim e normal bank loan becom largest singl asset class collater portfolio third uncov bank bond constitut largest market asset type most nonguarante form howev absolut amount share start declin sharpli thereaft due subdu issuanc volum increas risk avers concern counterparti risk addit decreas issuanc downgrad bank render larg part collater nonelig eurosystem oper result guarante unsecur bank bond domin nonguarante bank bond final due implement two month refinanc oper conduct decemb februari post collater general increas particular use cover bank bond late becom largest market asset type collater framework equal import analys whether observ scarciti collater region follow cyclic structur pattern cyclic main result prevail uncertainti market perceiv heighten counterparti risk lead market particip move unsecur secur fund thus increas need collater move could principl revers confid bank resili improv argu howev continu declin even disappear unsecur fund could perman effect balanc sheet structur bank although central bank may taken number measur address current stress bank balanc sheet enlarg collater framework purchas asset extend longer term liquid implement nonrecours repo swap liquid asset measur roll back discontinu soon crisi subsid structur chang demand collater hand would result seri regulatori chang liquid coverag ratio basel iii regulatori chang deriv trade propos capit charg solvenc ii insur make attract hold cover bond doddfrank act well structur move away unsecur toward secur fund arrang would perman natur may warrant chang central bank elig criteria collater prevent central bank oper ad overal demand competit highqual liquid collater bank thus central bank would need consid extend collater elig beyond demand asset fact central bank subject liquid risk nation currenc impli could choos accept highqual asset necessarili liquid asset case optim choic elig asset central bank would one minimis cost whole financi system take account need protect balanc sheet ensur independ maintain confid currenc general increas access avail collater use central bank oper privat repo market three typic medium longterm wholesal fund sourc need function proper ad valu issuer investor crisi import abl recours three sourc fund secur unsecur securitis confirm inde forc diversif work fulli liabil side due fact type secur slice risk differ way factor make three market longterm instrument act complement rather substitut may particular relev abss sinc unlik cover bond base extrem versatil under pool asset therefor under econom sector fund make somewhat differ secur asset exampl cover bond mainten work ongo especi respect cover bond ab market segment inde welcom move let final offer potenti polici respons mitig address negat effect collater scarciti forwardlook thought regard suppli collater asset financi institut eurosystem taken sever step make elast encourag creation new asset make easier mobilis exist one step also contribut restor impair monetari polici transmiss mechan let list five intervent support cover bond market two cover bond purchas programm cbpps aim reactiv primari market programm object eas fund condit encourag institut maintain expand lend client therebi contribut eurosystem role support function financi market perform catalyt function first purchas programm success restart activ primari cover bond market thus creat privat collater good qualiti ii lower minimum rate requir issuanc specif abss allow use addit credit claim iii lead act catalyst effort improv financi market condit increas transpar standardis market segment prime collateralis secur pcs initi ab market loanlevel data requir abss cover bond label initi initi european cover bond council common object marketl initi restor confid among investor market segment reintroduc sustain fund tool bank would happi engag initi foster market function creation good fair safe asset could use various collater system regard take opportun refer fourth initi current work eurosystem iv fourth initi implement crossbord triparti collater manag servic within eurosystem collater framework today servic avail limit number eurosystem counterparti small number countri germani luxembourg franc recent itali howev eurosystem goliv support crossbord use triparti collater manag servic via correspond central bank model ccbm therebi make equal avail euro area counterparti triparti servic increas avail collater allow consider effici deliveri collater eurosystem turn allow counterparti optimis use collater asset central bank market enhanc process even eurosystem also cooper market achiev interoper differ triparti offer v addit govern council ecb decid septemb widen collater framework accept market asset denomin foreign currenc fact look beyond nonstandard temporari measur moot point whether type collater denomin intern accept currenc stem effici financi system allow longerterm basi particular collater becom scarc across sever region general studi highlight relat scarciti highqual financi asset particular advanc economi abl generat relat safe asset appeal intern investor emerg market economi less abl context foster intern role currenc emerg economi could help creation safe liquid intern accept transact instrument posit aspect accept foreigndenomin collater fair clear term collater avail counterparti monetari polici payment system financi stabil sever challeng nevertheless emerg legal complic exchang rate risk oper risk point studi host last least order bank attract investor unsecur bank fund market well confid euro area must restor restor fiscal disciplin implement structur reform euro area sovereign debt view riskfre thus contribut collater suppli good qualiti addit last coupl year also made signific progress regard institut framework establish efsf launch esm approv sixpack legisl fiscal compact step toward bank union includ singl supervisori mechan let emphasis fundament way overcom collater scarciti ensur privat public deleverag well sustain growth growth generat sound asset e secur guarante high likelihood stream revenu thank attent would like thank pontus aberg contribut speech remain sole respons opinion express herein exodus king jame bibl geneakoplo j promis promis w b arthur durlauf d lane ed economi evolv complex system ii addisonwesley read ma pp collater scarciti see instanc level j capel collater becom scarc evid euro area dnb occasion studi vol figur includ haircut appli eurosystem see instanc caballero r j macroeconom asset shortag nber work paper caballero r j e farhi p o gourincha equilibrium model global imbal low interest rate american econom review pp capel j crossbord collater affect countri central bank prudenti supervisor dnb occasion studi vol reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en