Jean-Claude Trichet: Remarks on the future of European financial regulation and supervision,23-02-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,2550,"<p>Good morning ladies and gentlemen,I would like to thank Eddy Wymeersch for inviting me to deliver a keynote address at this conference on the future of European financial regulation and supervision, with a special focus on securities markets. Let me begin by describing current conditions in the financial sector, and the “lines of defence” that central banks and governments have established in an effort to combat systemic risks and to restore market confidence. In this context, I would like to highlight the crucial role that market participants need to play. Next, I will examine ways of reinforcing the resilience of the financial system. This is an issue that I hope you will be exploring in depth today. Finally, I will comment on the current debate about the EU’s supervisory framework. A change in this framework has in my view the potential to bring about a substantial improvement in our handling of the banking sector in Europe. First of all, let me say a few words about the situation we are facing now and the policy responses. The financial system of the euro area, like those of the other industrialised economies around the globe, is under severe strain. This is not news to anyone here. But what has become increasingly clear since the intensification of the crisis in mid-September last year is that the strains in the financial sector are spilling over into the real economy. This has set in motion a process of negative feedback between the financial sector and the real economy. The financial system is hampering economic recovery and, at the same time, the recession is putting greater pressure on the financial system. This situation is more difficult to combat than if the problems had remained largely confined to the financial sector.Net credit flows in the euro area remained positive during most of the financial turbulence, which has already lasted more than a year and a half. But in recent weeks we have seen the first signs of falling credit flows. Certainly, an important part of this fall is demand driven: firms have been postponing investment, reflecting the weakening economic outlook, and also households have cut back on borrowing for the same reason. However, there are indications that falling credit flows reflect also supply-side factors and tight financing conditions associated with a phenomenon of deleveraging. It is here that we have to closely watch developments. If such behaviour became widespread across the banking system, it would undermine the raison d’être of the system as a whole. But there are more positive some elements as far as the financing of the corporate sector is concerned. One of them is given by the corporate bond market, where issue volumes have remained significant. In January, euro non-financial corporate issuance even reached a record high. Hence, this channel is open, and it is functioning. Of course, not all firms are benefiting equally from it, the pricing has become tougher and high volumes are likely to be partially compensating for more difficult bank financing. But in an environment where we need to search for factors of reassurance, the considerable issuance volumes in the corporate bond market are noteworthy. Overall, however, there is no doubt that the situation in the financial sector and real economy remains very difficult. How are central banks, governments and other authorities responding to these challenges? And what more should they consider doing?The acute market conditions of last September prompted central banks to take a number of exceptional measures. These measures have been instrumental in organising a first line of defence against “systemic liquidity risk”. They include increasing the size and frequency of liquidity operations, extending the list of eligible collateral, significantly expanding our balance sheets and implementing unprecedented interest rate cuts. Compared with the period before the start of the turbulence, the Eurosystem’s balance sheet has grown by about €600 billion, an increase of 68%, representing just above 6% of the euro area GDP. This shows that our “intermediation role” has grown very significantly. We are now providing – and this is quite exceptional – unlimited refinancing to the banks of the euro area for maturities ranging from one week to six months in exchange for eligible collateral. This is a very important contribution to liquidity in the financial sector of the euro area. Governments for their part have organised a second line of defence against what I have called “systemic solvency risk”. Key measures have included recapitalisations, guarantees and asset support schemes. The Eurosystem has issued recommendations on the appropriate framework for both government guarantees and recapitalisation measures. The aim is to support the banking sector in a way that avoids creating distortions in the Single Market. Moreover, measures should be consistent with our liquidity management operations and they should not impair the implementation of the single monetary policy. The government measures are broadly in line with these recommendations. More recently, discussions have focused on asset support schemes. The aim is to remove the uncertainty surrounding the valuation of certain securitised assets on banks’ balance sheets. In this respect, the European Commission, in cooperation with the ECB, is defining broad guidelines for asset relief measures.Overall, the decisions governments took in October have helped to avert a major breakdown in confidence in the banking sector. Some of the measures are still being implemented or under consideration. The success of these measures ultimately depends on the financial institutions themselves. Financial institutions have an important responsibility to use the measures made available to them by the authorities, take them fully into account in their decision-making and continue lending to the economy.Let me now come to my second set of issues and explore ways to strengthen the financial system. Beyond the short-term need to maintain the effective intermediation function of the financial system, the crisis has highlighted substantial structural weaknesses in many areas of this system. This is where we need to rebuild and strengthen our defences. This effort should be focused on three goals: it should foster sustainability, it should strengthen resilience and it should be holistic in its reach. The first goal is a financial system that is sustainable in the long term. This means correcting some of the incentives that have led to excessive short-termism. It is now clear that the promise of significant returns in the short term was often linked to a misjudgement of underlying risk. At the level of individual institutions, compensation schemes must be adjusted to avoid encouraging excessive risk-taking on the basis of relatively small amounts of capital. Instead, the incentive structure should encourage profitability over the medium to longer term. At the level of the financial system, we need to be more resolute in preventing the build-up of risks. We must strengthen financial stability assessments and develop mechanisms for translating them into concrete measures. The ECB welcomes the proposals to reinforce macro-prudential oversight internationally. The envisaged closer cooperation between the International Monetary Fund and the Financial Stability Forum will be particularly useful. The second goal is to improve our resilience to shocks. In the years leading up to the crisis, holding capital reserves or larger amounts of liquid assets, which typically earn lower returns, came to be seen as an inefficient use of shareholders’ money. The underlying perspective can be compared to that in the corporate sector many years ago, when technological innovation led to the widespread introduction of the “just-in-time” model of doing business. This meant that firms held minimal inventory levels throughout the production chain. The result was a system that looked very efficient but that was very vulnerable to shocks. Something similar has happened to the financial system in recent years: the pressure to increase immediate shareholder value and short-term returns drove a number of institutions to limit their reserves and buffers to the minimum possible levels. And just as in manufacturing, the result has been a system that produced very high returns in the short term, but which proved vulnerable to shocks. Comparing the ex post returns with the considerable costs of the current turmoil, we have to realise that our financial system as a whole, including its non-regulated and non-listed entities, was neither strong nor efficient. It did not allocate capital properly, and it did not manage risks well. I have sometimes compared financial buffers with air bags in a car: what we have done in recent years is let part of the financial sector remove all the air bags. And now there has been an accident, we can see the scale of the injuries. We have to put reserves and buffers back into the system; they are the protection against serious damage in a downturn, and they are an integral part of sound finance. Such a large-scale reassessment is a matter for the medium term. In the present circumstances I wish to underline that banks should not be requested to hold more capital than is required by the existing capital framework. We should not today introduce “pro-cyclical” changes in the regulatory framework at a time when we are already observing a market-driven deleveraging of the first magnitude. The third goal is reforms that are holistic in scope. In this respect, an important issue, which I’m sure will be addressed by today’s conference, relates to the scope of financial regulation and prudential oversight. The current crisis is a loud and clear call to extend regulation and oversight to all systemically important institutions – notably hedge funds and credit rating agencies – as well as all systemically important markets – in particular the OTC derivatives market. What is currently under discussion is the precise way in which these elements should be integrated into an overall regulatory framework. Currently, we are in the process of identifying the regulatory gaps. This is taking place within an international discussion, which the ECB strongly supports. The ultimate aim must be to extend the regulatory net to cover all instruments, institutions and markets that are either systemically important or which play a key role for the functioning of markets. Hedge funds and credit rating agencies are at the centre of the debate. In Europe, the discussions on proposed regulatory initiatives to establish a harmonised framework for credit rating agencies and on assessing possible initiatives for hedge funds are important. The proposed regulatory framework for the registration and oversight of rating agencies – with an important role for the Committee of European Securities Supervisors and the Committee of European Banking Supervisors – goes in the right direction. I also welcome the Commission’s initiative to launch a public consultation on hedge funds, to which the Eurosystem will contribute. Let me stress that both initiatives, on rating agencies and hedge funds, warrant strong international coordination. The G20, of which the ECB is a member, is setting the key milestones in this context. The outcome of this debate should be an international agreement about the key features of the new regulatory paradigm. I mentioned the OTC derivatives market; this is a prime example of a systemically important market that requires more transparency and a better infrastructure. The ECB’s Governing Council has already called for a strengthening of the infrastructure for this market in view of its systemic importance. We also support the position of ECOFIN, which in December 2008 endorsed the idea of introducing a European CCP for OTC credit default swap markets. And we see considerable merit in having this infrastructure located within the euro area. Let me now come to the third and last element of my reflections this morning: the supervisory framework in Europe. Many issues are currently under consideration. I would like to focus on a dimension that is very relevant from a central banking perspective, namely macro-prudential supervision. Macro-prudential supervision of the financial system by central banks needs to be strengthened. There is an international consensus emerging on this need, in the context of the lessons from the financial crisis. The ECB and the Eurosystem have the technical capacity to assume a stronger role in macro-prudential supervision. Indeed, it would be a natural extension of the mandate already assigned to us by the Treaty, namely to contribute to financial stability. The tasks of macro-prudential supervision include the monitoring and analysis of financial stability, which the ECB is already undertaking. But this goes beyond monitoring and analysis: macro-prudential supervision includes developing early warning systems for the risks in the financial system; it includes conducting macro stress-testing exercises; and it also includes an advisory role on financial regulation and supervision from a financial stability perspective. Importantly, effective macro-prudential supervision depends on access to data and its translation into concrete measures. Access to relevant data is essential for the assessment of risks and vulnerabilities in the financial system. This is why such access must be part and parcel of a well-functioning arrangement for macro-prudential supervision. Two issues need to be considered here. First, there is a need for a higher degree of transparency as regards the activities of financial institutions and markets that are relevant from a financial stability perspective. Supervisors and financial institutions have a role to play in enhancing transparency in their domains. To mention a specific example, we very much welcome the current dialogue between the ECB and CESR on the possibility of creating a standard for reference data on securities and issuers, with the aim of making such data available to policy-makers, regulators and the financial industry through an international public infrastructure. Such an infrastructure would enable all interested parties to produce more timely analysis of increasingly complex financial markets, especially in times of turbulence.Second, central banks need to have access to the supervisory information that is essential for their financial stability assessments. Central banks and supervisors will also have to work together to establish an operational agreement for the information flow in both directions. This is not always straightforward in Europe given the multitude of actors involved, but here, too, current developments give us a clear mandate, even an obligation, to improve the information flow. The ECB/Eurosystem stands ready to perform additional macro-prudential supervisory tasks. With our financial stability analysis, which has been well established over a number of years, we have already laid important foundations for such a role.Let me conclude. I have mentioned the lines of defence established by central banks and governments, to safeguard, respectively, liquidity and solvency in the financial system. The reform of the regulatory and supervisory framework at the EU and international levels must substantially enhance the stability of the global financial system. The system must strengthen itself and build up its own defences. I propose a strengthening of the financial system that focuses on three goals: long-term sustainability, improved resilience and a holistic perspective. The EU has the opportunity for an important institutional change. It can adapt the supervisory framework to the new financial landscape, reflecting the considerable increase in European financial integration that we have observed in recent years. This must be one of the key lessons for us to draw from the financial crisis. The ECB/Eurosystem stands ready to accept any additional responsibilities that the Member States may wish to assign to us, in accordance with the Treaty.I am sure that today’s conference will provide valuable insights on all these matters.Thank you for your attention. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",good morn ladi gentlemen would like thank eddi wymeersch invit deliv keynot address confer futur european financi regul supervis special focus secur market let begin describ current condit financi sector line defenc central bank govern establish effort combat system risk restor market confid context would like highlight crucial role market particip need play next examin way reinforc resili financi system issu hope explor depth today final comment current debat eu supervisori framework chang framework view potenti bring substanti improv handl bank sector europ first let say word situat face polici respons financi system euro area like industrialis economi around globe sever strain news anyon becom increas clear sinc intensif crisi midseptemb last year strain financi sector spill real economi set motion process negat feedback financi sector real economi financi system hamper econom recoveri time recess put greater pressur financi system situat difficult combat problem remain larg confin financi sector net credit flow euro area remain posit financi turbul alreadi last year half recent week seen first sign fall credit flow certain import part fall demand driven firm postpon invest reflect weaken econom outlook also household cut back borrow reason howev indic fall credit flow reflect also supplysid factor tight financ condit associ phenomenon deleverag close watch develop behaviour becam widespread across bank system would undermin raison d être system whole posit element far financ corpor sector concern one given corpor bond market issu volum remain signific januari euro nonfinanci corpor issuanc even reach record high henc channel open function cours firm benefit equal price becom tougher high volum like partial compens difficult bank financ environ need search factor reassur consider issuanc volum corpor bond market noteworthi overal howev doubt situat financi sector real economi remain difficult central bank govern author respond challeng consid acut market condit last septemb prompt central bank take number except measur measur instrument organis first line defenc system liquid risk includ increas size frequenc liquid oper extend list elig collater signific expand balanc sheet implement unpreced interest rate cut compar period start turbul eurosystem balanc sheet grown billion increas repres euro area gdp show intermedi role grown signific provid quit except unlimit refinanc bank euro area matur rang one week six month exchang elig collater import contribut liquid financi sector euro area govern part organis second line defenc call system solvenc risk key measur includ recapitalis guarante asset support scheme eurosystem issu recommend appropri framework govern guarante recapitalis measur aim support bank sector way avoid creat distort singl market moreov measur consist liquid manag oper impair implement singl monetari polici govern measur broad line recommend recent discuss focus asset support scheme aim remov uncertainti surround valuat certain securitis asset bank balanc sheet respect european commiss cooper ecb defin broad guidelin asset relief measur overal decis govern took octob help avert major breakdown confid bank sector measur still implement consider success measur ultim depend financi institut financi institut import respons use measur made avail author take fulli account decisionmak continu lend economi let come second set issu explor way strengthen financi system beyond shortterm need maintain effect intermedi function financi system crisi highlight substanti structur weak mani area system need rebuild strengthen defenc effort focus three goal foster sustain strengthen resili holist reach first goal financi system sustain long term mean correct incent led excess shortterm clear promis signific return short term often link misjudg under risk level individu institut compens scheme must adjust avoid encourag excess risktak basi relat small amount capit instead incent structur encourag profit medium longer term level financi system need resolut prevent buildup risk must strengthen financi stabil assess develop mechan translat concret measur ecb welcom propos reinforc macroprudenti oversight intern envisag closer cooper intern monetari fund financi stabil forum particular use second goal improv resili shock year lead crisi hold capit reserv larger amount liquid asset typic earn lower return came seen ineffici use sharehold money under perspect compar corpor sector mani year ago technolog innov led widespread introduct justintim model busi meant firm held minim inventori level throughout product chain result system look effici vulner shock someth similar happen financi system recent year pressur increas immedi sharehold valu shortterm return drove number institut limit reserv buffer minimum possibl level manufactur result system produc high return short term prove vulner shock compar ex post return consider cost current turmoil realis financi system whole includ nonregul nonlist entiti neither strong effici alloc capit proper manag risk well sometim compar financi buffer air bag car done recent year let part financi sector remov air bag accid see scale injuri put reserv buffer back system protect serious damag downturn integr part sound financ largescal reassess matter medium term present circumst wish underlin bank request hold capit requir exist capit framework today introduc procycl chang regulatori framework time alreadi observ marketdriven deleverag first magnitud third goal reform holist scope respect import issu m sure address today confer relat scope financi regul prudenti oversight current crisi loud clear call extend regul oversight system import institut notabl hedg fund credit rate agenc well system import market particular otc deriv market current discuss precis way element integr overal regulatori framework current process identifi regulatori gap take place within intern discuss ecb strong support ultim aim must extend regulatori net cover instrument institut market either system import play key role function market hedg fund credit rate agenc centr debat europ discuss propos regulatori initi establish harmonis framework credit rate agenc assess possibl initi hedg fund import propos regulatori framework registr oversight rate agenc import role committe european secur supervisor committe european bank supervisor goe right direct also welcom commiss initi launch public consult hedg fund eurosystem contribut let stress initi rate agenc hedg fund warrant strong intern coordin g ecb member set key mileston context outcom debat intern agreement key featur new regulatori paradigm mention otc deriv market prime exampl system import market requir transpar better infrastructur ecb govern council alreadi call strengthen infrastructur market view system import also support posit ecofin decemb endors idea introduc european ccp otc credit default swap market see consider merit infrastructur locat within euro area let come third last element reflect morn supervisori framework europ mani issu current consider would like focus dimens relev central bank perspect name macroprudenti supervis macroprudenti supervis financi system central bank need strengthen intern consensus emerg need context lesson financi crisi ecb eurosystem technic capac assum stronger role macroprudenti supervis inde would natur extens mandat alreadi assign us treati name contribut financi stabil task macroprudenti supervis includ monitor analysi financi stabil ecb alreadi undertak goe beyond monitor analysi macroprudenti supervis includ develop earli warn system risk financi system includ conduct macro stresstest exercis also includ advisori role financi regul supervis financi stabil perspect import effect macroprudenti supervis depend access data translat concret measur access relev data essenti assess risk vulner financi system access must part parcel wellfunct arrang macroprudenti supervis two issu need consid first need higher degre transpar regard activ financi institut market relev financi stabil perspect supervisor financi institut role play enhanc transpar domain mention specif exampl much welcom current dialogu ecb cesr possibl creat standard refer data secur issuer aim make data avail policymak regul financi industri intern public infrastructur infrastructur would enabl interest parti produc time analysi increas complex financi market especi time turbul second central bank need access supervisori inform essenti financi stabil assess central bank supervisor also work togeth establish oper agreement inform flow direct alway straightforward europ given multitud actor involv current develop give us clear mandat even oblig improv inform flow ecbeurosystem stand readi perform addit macroprudenti supervisori task financi stabil analysi well establish number year alreadi laid import foundat role let conclud mention line defenc establish central bank govern safeguard respect liquid solvenc financi system reform regulatori supervisori framework eu intern level must substanti enhanc stabil global financi system system must strengthen build defenc propos strengthen financi system focus three goal longterm sustain improv resili holist perspect eu opportun import institut chang adapt supervisori framework new financi landscap reflect consider increas european financi integr observ recent year must one key lesson us draw financi crisi ecbeurosystem stand readi accept addit respons member state may wish assign us accord treati sure today confer provid valuabl insight matter thank attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en