Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The Challenges Facing the Euro Area,01-11-2010,European Central Bank,ECB,2475,"<p>Over the coming months and years the euro area will face two types of challenges. The first one – which is very similar to that of other major advanced economies – is to consolidate public finances and at the same time restore economic growth. The second challenge – more idiosyncratic – is to strengthen the institutional basis of the single currency so as to avoid having to face again the problems we experienced in the recent crisis. Let me address these two challenges in turn.Concerning the current economic challenges, euro area policy makers share the following five points:The crisis is the result of a combination of structural and cyclical factors. Overcoming the crisis thus requires both macroeconomic and structural policies. Macroeconomic policies have been quite effective in counteracting depressionnary forces, especially after the Lehman Brothers’ crisis, but they cannot by themselves bring the economy back to the pre-crisis growth path.Structural measures are essential to increase growth potential of euro area economies over the coming years. They affect different policy areas, such as the labour markets or the banking system, which in many countries need to be strengthened and restructured.As far as monetary policy is concerned, the non-standard measures implemented during the crisis have contributed to the smooth functioning of financial markets. The flow of credit to the private sector is progressively rebounding. The exceptional measures are being removed as economic and financial market conditions improve. Fiscal policy needs to be adjusted and brought on a sustainable path, with a view to preserve – or restore – the confidence of financial markets.I would like to elaborate on the last point, i.e. fiscal consolidation. Although there is a broad agreement on the need for consolidation in the euro area, the situation differs across countries. Some are in a better condition, either because they kept firmer control over public finances prior to the crisis or because they are experiencing stronger growth performance. The situation is more challenging in countries where economic growth is sluggish and large fiscal imbalances have been accumulated. There is a risk of a vicious circle, which can develop as a result of the following:Restrictive fiscal policies are politically difficult to implement and thus tend to be delayed, because of the feared negative impact on the economy.As countries show hesitation in addressing their budgetary problems, access to financial markets tends to become more difficult.When market access deteriorates, the budgetary measures required to restore confidence are much more drastic and painful. Some observers, especially outside Europe, have suggested that European democracies are not able to deal with such a vicious circle. They consider that the only way out of the dilemma is a default, or a partial default. Some have – even recently – voiced openly this view, maybe with the intent to influence financial markets and increase the probability of such an event to occur; an event from which they would presumably take profit. This view, however, does not take into consideration that in advanced economies a sovereign default is very damaging for the citizens of the country concerned, as it would drastically affect their wealth. Increasing the primary surplus, either by cutting expenditure or by increasing – in certain cases by starting to pay – taxes, has in most cases less damaging effects on the economy and on citizens’ well-being than a cut in the value of their financial assets.To sum up, consolidating public finances is painful economically and politically, but the alternative is worse. Governments in Europe are fully aware of this.Let me move to the second issue, which concerns the strengthening of the institutional framework underlying the single currency. To understand the issue one should first consider what did not work as expected during the first ten years of the euro. Two main things did not work. First, in some countries the behaviour of the private and public sector was not fully consistent with the long run requirements of a single currency area. Divergences may occur in currency unions, or even within countries, as some regions may grow more than others and experience booms which then burst. In the euro area, the lack of a federal budget transforms country-specific shocks into public finance shocks and thus financial stability shocks. This is why a currency union like the euro area needs a system of discipline for both the public and the private sector, to be exercised at the level of the member states.The euro area had a system aimed at disciplining the public sector, i.e. the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP), with rules and procedures aimed at avoiding excessive deficits. The Pact worked in some cases, but not all. The main reason has been that the Eurogroup, which comprises the Finance Ministers of the euro area and is in charge of implementing the SGP, has not been able to put sufficient pressure on countries to ensure fiscal discipline. To quote a frequently used sentence, “ When potential future sinners have to judge current sinners, the tendency for forgiveness prevails”. The euro area had no system to discipline the private sector and avoid imbalances, especially for catching up countries. Even when presented with evidence about the growing divergences in cost competitiveness, the Eurogroup did not show much interest and did not take action. However, there is substantial evidence showing that in countries which experienced major competitiveness losses public sector wages often led the way for pay rises in the private sector. Furthermore, excessive private credit growth, especially mortgages, has often been the result of distortionary tax treatments.How can the problem be fixed? There are two avenues. The first is to recognize the limited powers of the Eurogroup and move to a rules-based system, with automatic procedures and sanctions. That was the approach followed by the ECB in its published proposal for reform of the SGP, and partly also the approach of the European Commission. The Heads of State and Government of the European Union followed a second avenue, as they wanted to retain the ability to decide on budgetary matters, in particular concerning the imposition of sanctions on countries not respecting the rules. They did not want to deprive themselves of their powers in favour of the European Commission, nor to bind themselves with a rules-based approach. This position might be understandable from a political point of view. But it doesn’t resolve the problem that I raised previously, concerning potential sinners forgiving the current ones. No change has been made to the system of governance aimed at reducing the perverse incentives. Why should the Eurogroup be expected to behave in the future any differently than in the past? The question remains unanswered. The discussion is not over yet, as the new mechanism will now have to be discussed and agreed with the European Parliament. The Parliament might come up with ways to make the Eurogroup more accountable in its implementation of the SGP, with a view to safeguard the general interests for sound budgetary policies against the incentives for mutual forgiveness. The second failure was to assume that simply by adopting a system of rules there would be no more crises. If there are no crises there is no need for a crisis management framework. This was very naïve and ultimately turned out to be a mistake. Experience shows that crises do occur, even in the best of worlds. Of course, it’s not easy to build a crisis management framework. But it might not be that complicated either, learning from the experience of the International Monetary Fund and the European Financial Stability Fund, which has just been built to address the current crisis.I believe that there is a broad agreement on what we don’t want. We don’t want a system which: creates moral hazard and induces countries to embark on loose policies in the expectation that they would be bailed out.makes taxpayers (of other countries) having to bail out bad investment decisions made by the private sector.creates incentives for speculative attacks that could push into bankruptcy even an otherwise solvent country.To achieve these objectives, we don’t have to reinvent the wheel. We have the model of the IMF to guide us. I would just make three main points in this respect.First, the best way to avoid moral hazard is to attach strong conditionality to any support package. In addition, any financial support has to be at penalty rates, as it is the case for the IMF. Over time the IMF-style conditionality has led to a sharp reduction of the number of countries resorting to the IMF. No country turns happily to the IMF for financial support. Second, the best way to avoid that taxpayers bail out private investors is to ensure that any support provided by the new European mechanism has preferred creditor status, like the IMF. This means that the funds lent by the institution have to be reimbursed first, before the private sector. Again, the experience shows that countries do reimburse the IMF. When countries are in arrears with the IMF – which is currently the case of Somalia, Sudan and Zimbabwe - they have de-facto exited the International Community. The existing EFSF does not have preferred creditor status because it is the result of an inter-governmental agreement rather than a supra-national institution. The European Investment Bank, instead, which is inscribed in the EU Treaty enjoys preferred creditor status. Given that the new mechanism will be created as a result of a Treaty change, it can have a preferred status.Third, the best way to avoid triggering speculative attacks against the member states is to link the financial support provided to countries to the latter’s ability to repay, in particular to debt sustainability. There should be no automatic mechanism linking financial support to debt restructuring, because it would attract speculative pressure and precipitate a crisis, even for countries that are solvent.This raises the issue of how to deal with countries that are not in a position to repay all their debt. Such a possibility cannot be excluded. Again, the experience of the IMF shows that there have been cases of debt restructuring associated with Fund programmes, even though debt restructuring is not considered in the Articles of Agreement of the IMF. Out of 113 IMF support programmes over the last 20 years, only 19 countries defaulted or restructured their debts. The countries which went through such action – Algeria, Argentina, Cote d’Ivoire, Dominican republic, Ecuador, Gabon, Grenada, Indonesia, Kenya, Moldova, Nigeria, Pakistan, Paraguay, Russia, Seychelles, Ukraine, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zimbabwe – have characteristics which are not very similar to euro area members. In all these cases restructuring was done on a case-by-case basis, depending on the specific circumstances. It is suggested by some that precise rules and conditions for debt restructuring should be attached to the creation of the new European mechanism, with a view to achieve an orderly restructuring. In my view this is “unnecessary, undesirable, and unlikely”, to quote a recent Staff paper by the IMF.It is unnecessary because experience shows that restructuring can take place even without international norms and without the IMF being given specific powers in this field. It is undesirable because there is a risk that norms designed at addressing problems of the past are not any more valid for complex financial systems and may even aggravate the situation. Most crises of the past had to deal mainly with foreign creditors of developing countries. In advanced economies the restructuring of the public debt would have to involve a much larger number of financial assets and liabilities, including those of the domestic banking system vis-à-vis residents and non residents. It can be easily seen that there can hardly be anything “orderly” in such a process. Attempts to work on this issue should certainly not be discouraged. The IMF experience in this field is again telling. There studies and discussions on the design of a mechanism for Sovereign Debt Restructuring took much effort and lasted several years. The result was intellectually interesting but ultimately not agreed, neither by the sovereign states neither by financial market participants. This doesn’t mean we shouldn’t try again. But we should be aware that calling for an orderly debt restructuring mechanism sounds nice and is costless. Designing and implementing it is somewhat different, and has not been done yet, like many other nice catchwords which have attracted our intellectual interest in the past.Some work can be done, and has been done, in developing mechanisms which make it easier for creditors and debtors to agree on revising the contractual terms. Substantial work has been done for instance on collective action clauses, which set minimum thresholds for debtor representation needed to agree on a restructuring. These mechanisms exist currently in many national laws. It might be more promising and pragmatic to further explore this avenue.To conclude, the euro area is facing several challenges. Some are similar to those of other countries, some are idiosyncratic. If the experience of the last few months teaches us something it is that Europeans are fully aware of these challenges and want to address them to make sure that the euro area gets out from this crisis stronger than before. Many of the actions taken so far will indeed make it stronger and more resilient. On other measures the discussion is still ongoing and the jury is out. I recognize that seen from far away, it’s sometimes difficult to understand what’s really going on in Europe. It’s difficult to follow the debate, to forecast the outcome. This is perfectly understandable. As in all democracies decisions are preceded by intense debates. In Europe we have the additional complication that the debate takes place not only within countries but also between countries, in the open. When decisions are made, and compromises are struck, which by definition cannot make everybody happy, additional debates develop. This may be disorienting for outsiders. You may need a compass.We have a clear compass to use in Europe, it’s the Treaty. It guides us every day, for instance in the conduct of monetary policy in the euro area, providing the central bank with a clear objective for the benefit of European citizens; an objective which has been achieved over the last ten years. The Treaty also guides other institutions in their functions. This might not be enough, as the compass may not always be sufficiently precise. What’s important is to recognize such shortcomings and stand ready to address them. What one should take from the series of decisions that have been made over the last few months, including that of changing the Treaty, is the willingness to build a stronger Europe, a stronger and more resilient euro area, capable of facing future crises. Thank you for your attention.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",come month year euro area face two type challeng first one similar major advanc economi consolid public financ time restor econom growth second challeng idiosyncrat strengthen institut basi singl currenc avoid face problem experienc recent crisi let address two challeng turn concern current econom challeng euro area polici maker share follow five point crisi result combin structur cyclic factor overcom crisi thus requir macroeconom structur polici macroeconom polici quit effect counteract depressionnari forc especi lehman brother crisi cannot bring economi back precrisi growth path structur measur essenti increas growth potenti euro area economi come year affect differ polici area labour market bank system mani countri need strengthen restructur far monetari polici concern nonstandard measur implement crisi contribut smooth function financi market flow credit privat sector progress rebound except measur remov econom financi market condit improv fiscal polici need adjust brought sustain path view preserv restor confid financi market would like elabor last point e fiscal consolid although broad agreement need consolid euro area situat differ across countri better condit either kept firmer control public financ prior crisi experienc stronger growth perform situat challeng countri econom growth sluggish larg fiscal imbal accumul risk vicious circl develop result follow restrict fiscal polici polit difficult implement thus tend delay fear negat impact economi countri show hesit address budgetari problem access financi market tend becom difficult market access deterior budgetari measur requir restor confid much drastic pain observ especi outsid europ suggest european democraci abl deal vicious circl consid way dilemma default partial default even recent voic open view mayb intent influenc financi market increas probabl event occur event would presum take profit view howev take consider advanc economi sovereign default damag citizen countri concern would drastic affect wealth increas primari surplus either cut expenditur increas certain case start pay tax case less damag effect economi citizen wellb cut valu financi asset sum consolid public financ pain econom polit altern wors govern europ fulli awar let move second issu concern strengthen institut framework under singl currenc understand issu one first consid work expect first ten year euro two main thing work first countri behaviour privat public sector fulli consist long run requir singl currenc area diverg may occur currenc union even within countri region may grow other experi boom burst euro area lack feder budget transform countryspecif shock public financ shock thus financi stabil shock currenc union like euro area need system disciplin public privat sector exercis level member state euro area system aim disciplin public sector e stabil growth pact sgp rule procedur aim avoid excess deficit pact work case main reason eurogroup compris financ minist euro area charg implement sgp abl put suffici pressur countri ensur fiscal disciplin quot frequent use sentenc potenti futur sinner judg current sinner tendenc forgiv prevail euro area system disciplin privat sector avoid imbal especi catch countri even present evid grow diverg cost competit eurogroup show much interest take action howev substanti evid show countri experienc major competit loss public sector wage often led way pay rise privat sector furthermor excess privat credit growth especi mortgag often result distortionari tax treatment problem fix two avenu first recogn limit power eurogroup move rulesbas system automat procedur sanction approach follow ecb publish propos reform sgp part also approach european commiss head state govern european union follow second avenu want retain abil decid budgetari matter particular concern imposit sanction countri respect rule want depriv power favour european commiss bind rulesbas approach posit might understand polit point view doesn resolv problem rais previous concern potenti sinner forgiv current one chang made system govern aim reduc pervers incent eurogroup expect behav futur differ past question remain unansw discuss yet new mechan discuss agre european parliament parliament might come way make eurogroup account implement sgp view safeguard general interest sound budgetari polici incent mutual forgiv second failur assum simpli adopt system rule would crise crise need crisi manag framework naïv ultim turn mistak experi show crise occur even best world cours easi build crisi manag framework might complic either learn experi intern monetari fund european financi stabil fund built address current crisi believ broad agreement want want system creat moral hazard induc countri embark loos polici expect would bail make taxpay countri bail bad invest decis made privat sector creat incent specul attack could push bankruptci even otherwis solvent countri achiev object reinvent wheel model imf guid us would make three main point respect first best way avoid moral hazard attach strong condit support packag addit financi support penalti rate case imf time imfstyl condit led sharp reduct number countri resort imf countri turn happili imf financi support second best way avoid taxpay bail privat investor ensur support provid new european mechan prefer creditor status like imf mean fund lent institut reimburs first privat sector experi show countri reimburs imf countri arrear imf current case somalia sudan zimbabw defacto exit intern communiti exist efsf prefer creditor status result intergovernment agreement rather supran institut european invest bank instead inscrib eu treati enjoy prefer creditor status given new mechan creat result treati chang prefer status third best way avoid trigger specul attack member state link financi support provid countri latter abil repay particular debt sustain automat mechan link financi support debt restructur would attract specul pressur precipit crisi even countri solvent rais issu deal countri posit repay debt possibl cannot exclud experi imf show case debt restructur associ fund programm even though debt restructur consid articl agreement imf imf support programm last year countri default restructur debt countri went action algeria argentina cote d ivoir dominican republ ecuador gabon grenada indonesia kenya moldova nigeria pakistan paraguay russia seychell ukrain uruguay venezuela zimbabw characterist similar euro area member case restructur done casebycas basi depend specif circumst suggest precis rule condit debt restructur attach creation new european mechan view achiev order restructur view unnecessari undesir unlik quot recent staff paper imf unnecessari experi show restructur take place even without intern norm without imf given specif power field undesir risk norm design address problem past valid complex financi system may even aggrav situat crise past deal main foreign creditor develop countri advanc economi restructur public debt would involv much larger number financi asset liabil includ domest bank system visàvi resid non resid easili seen hard anyth order process attempt work issu certain discourag imf experi field tell studi discuss design mechan sovereign debt restructur took much effort last sever year result intellectu interest ultim agre neither sovereign state neither financi market particip doesn mean shouldn tri awar call order debt restructur mechan sound nice costless design implement somewhat differ done yet like mani nice catchword attract intellectu interest past work done done develop mechan make easier creditor debtor agre revis contractu term substanti work done instanc collect action claus set minimum threshold debtor represent need agre restructur mechan exist current mani nation law might promis pragmat explor avenu conclud euro area face sever challeng similar countri idiosyncrat experi last month teach us someth european fulli awar challeng want address make sure euro area get crisi stronger mani action taken far inde make stronger resili measur discuss still ongo juri recogn seen far away sometim difficult understand realli go europ difficult follow debat forecast outcom perfect understand democraci decis preced intens debat europ addit complic debat take place within countri also countri open decis made compromis struck definit cannot make everybodi happi addit debat develop may disori outsid may need compass clear compass use europ treati guid us everi day instanc conduct monetari polici euro area provid central bank clear object benefit european citizen object achiev last ten year treati also guid institut function might enough compass may alway suffici precis import recogn shortcom stand readi address one take seri decis made last month includ chang treati willing build stronger europ stronger resili euro area capabl face futur crise thank attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en