"Mario Draghi: Euro area economic outlook,  the ECB’s monetary policy  and current policy challenges",10-04-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,1243,"<p>I would like to focus on the euro area economic outlook, the ECB’s monetary policy and current policy challenges.The recovery in the euro area is ongoing. Euro area real GDP has now increased for three consecutive quarters and recent survey data are consistent with a continuation of this trend. Looking ahead, a strengthening contribution from domestic demand should materialise, supported by our accommodative monetary policy stance, ongoing improvements in financing conditions working their way through to the real economy, and the progress made by euro area countries in terms of fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. In addition, real incomes are positively influenced by moderate commodity price developments, in particular lower energy prices. Economic activity is also expected to benefit from a gradual strengthening of demand for euro area exports. At the same time, however, unemployment in the euro area remains high, even if labour markets have shown first signs of improvement, and, overall, unutilised capacity is sizeable. Moreover, the necessary balance sheet adjustments in the public and private sectors will continue to weigh on the pace of the economic recovery. The risks surrounding the euro area economic outlook continue to be on the downside. They relate to geopolitical risks and an insufficient implementation of structural reforms in euro area countries as well as to developments in global financial markets and in emerging market economies. Recent information remains consistent with our expectation of a prolonged period of low inflation that will be followed by a gradual upward movement in consumer prices (HICP inflation rates) during 2015 to reach levels closer to 2% towards the end of 2016. The gradual decline in euro area inflation rates since last summer primarily reflects negative contributions from energy prices as well as a substantial fall in unprocessed food price inflation. At the same time, medium to long-term inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in line with our definition of price stability. Both upside and downside risks to the outlook for price developments remain limited, and broadly balanced over the medium term. In this context, the possible repercussions of geopolitical risks and exchange rate developments will be monitored closely. The ECB’s monetary policy stance continues to be geared towards maintaining the degree of monetary accommodation warranted by the outlook for price stability. It thereby assists the gradual recovery in economic activity. Looking ahead, the ECB is resolute in its determination to maintain a high degree of monetary accommodation and to act swiftly if required. Hence, the ECB’s Governing Council does not exclude further monetary policy easing and it firmly reiterates that it continues to expect the key ECB interest rates to remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of time. This expectation is based on an overall subdued outlook for inflation extending into the medium term, given the broad-based weakness of the economy, the high degree of unutilised capacity and subdued money and credit dynamics. The Governing Council is unanimous in its commitment to using also unconventional instruments within the ECB’s mandate in order to cope effectively with risks of a too prolonged period of low inflation. At the same time, it is closely following developments on money markets. Since the summer of 2012, substantial progress has been made in improving the funding situation of banks in the euro area. In order to ensure an adequate transmission of monetary policy to financing conditions in all euro area countries, the fragmentation of euro area credit markets should decline further and the resilience of banks must be strengthened where needed. The comprehensive assessment by the ECB, which is now well underway, will make an important contribution in this regards. It should also foster transparency of banks’ balance sheets and strengthen confidence in the banks, thereby supporting a revival of bank credit in the euro area. As a matter of fact, banks in the euro area are continuing to strengthen their balance sheets already ahead of the execution phase of the asset quality review by the ECB and the subsequent stress test foreseen for the autumn. The ECB is also contributing towards a revitalisation of the asset-backed securities market in Europe, which would be an important avenue to further support credit flows in the euro area and for the credit transmission channel.Important further progress on the road to banking union has been made since the previous IMFC meeting. The ECB’s internal preparations for the operational start of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) are well underway. The Supervisory Board has been fully operational since the start of this year and is among other things finalising the SSM supervisory model. On the legislative front, political agreements have been reached at the European level between the EU Council and the European Parliament on the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive and the Deposit Guarantee Schemes Directive. More recently, agreement has also been reached on the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM), with an effective governance and a clear road map towards constituting a Single Resolution Fund. In combination with the agreement to enhance the Fund’s borrowing capacity, this will help to break the link between national banking systems and sovereigns within the euro area and it will protect taxpayers’ money in the orderly resolution, notably, of cross-border cases. It is important now to keep up the legislative momentum, also at the national level, in order for the SSM and the SRM to become operational within approximately one year. It is worth acknowledging the very significant progress that has been made in less than two years on Europe’s ambitious commitment to build a genuine banking union. As regards fiscal policies, euro area countries have made substantial progress with fiscal consolidation over the past few years. In the euro area, the average budget deficit has halved compared with the peak level during the crisis. This has created some room for slowing the pace of consolidation. However, we must avoid the pitfall of being complacent in order not to repeat the mistakes from pre-crisis times. Euro area countries should not unravel past consolidation achievements and should put high government debt ratios on a downward trajectory over the medium term, in line with the Stability and Growth Pact. Fiscal strategies should ensure a growth-friendly composition of consolidation to achieve better quality and more efficient public services. In this respect, we welcome the work presented in the last two editions of the IMF Fiscal Monitor on identifying well-designed and growth-friendly consolidation measures on the revenue and expenditure sides of the budget.Lastly, although major progress has been made, euro area countries need to strengthen their efforts to reform their labour and product markets in a decisive way in order to improve competitiveness, raise potential growth and generate employment opportunities. More precisely, labour markets need to be more inclusive, flexible and resilient, while product markets, including those for services, should be made more efficient and dynamic. In addition, countries should take further steps towards improving the business environment and more growth-friendly taxation. Bold and effective implementation of these measures is crucial and primarily in the interest of the individual countries. At the same time, it is key for strengthening the functioning of the Economic and Monetary Union and will support the global recovery. Finally, it is also fully congruent with the call of the IMF Managing Director in her Global Policy Agenda for the euro area to make its contribution to reinvigorating global growth and employment.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",would like focus euro area econom outlook ecb monetari polici current polici challeng recoveri euro area ongo euro area real gdp increas three consecut quarter recent survey data consist continu trend look ahead strengthen contribut domest demand materialis support accommod monetari polici stanc ongo improv financ condit work way real economi progress made euro area countri term fiscal consolid structur reform addit real incom posit influenc moder commod price develop particular lower energi price econom activ also expect benefit gradual strengthen demand euro area export time howev unemploy euro area remain high even labour market shown first sign improv overal unutilis capac sizeabl moreov necessari balanc sheet adjust public privat sector continu weigh pace econom recoveri risk surround euro area econom outlook continu downsid relat geopolit risk insuffici implement structur reform euro area countri well develop global financi market emerg market economi recent inform remain consist expect prolong period low inflat follow gradual upward movement consum price hicp inflat rate reach level closer toward end gradual declin euro area inflat rate sinc last summer primarili reflect negat contribut energi price well substanti fall unprocess food price inflat time medium longterm inflat expect remain firm anchor line definit price stabil upsid downsid risk outlook price develop remain limit broad balanc medium term context possibl repercuss geopolit risk exchang rate develop monitor close ecb monetari polici stanc continu gear toward maintain degre monetari accommod warrant outlook price stabil therebi assist gradual recoveri econom activ look ahead ecb resolut determin maintain high degre monetari accommod act swift requir henc ecb govern council exclud monetari polici eas firm reiter continu expect key ecb interest rate remain present lower level extend period time expect base overal subdu outlook inflat extend medium term given broadbas weak economi high degre unutilis capac subdu money credit dynam govern council unanim commit use also unconvent instrument within ecb mandat order cope effect risk prolong period low inflat time close follow develop money market sinc summer substanti progress made improv fund situat bank euro area order ensur adequ transmiss monetari polici financ condit euro area countri fragment euro area credit market declin resili bank must strengthen need comprehens assess ecb well underway make import contribut regard also foster transpar bank balanc sheet strengthen confid bank therebi support reviv bank credit euro area matter fact bank euro area continu strengthen balanc sheet alreadi ahead execut phase asset qualiti review ecb subsequ stress test foreseen autumn ecb also contribut toward revitalis assetback secur market europ would import avenu support credit flow euro area credit transmiss channel import progress road bank union made sinc previous imfc meet ecb intern prepar oper start singl supervisori mechan ssm well underway supervisori board fulli oper sinc start year among thing finalis ssm supervisori model legisl front polit agreement reach european level eu council european parliament bank recoveri resolut direct deposit guarante scheme direct recent agreement also reach singl resolut mechan srm effect govern clear road map toward constitut singl resolut fund combin agreement enhanc fund borrow capac help break link nation bank system sovereign within euro area protect taxpay money order resolut notabl crossbord case import keep legisl momentum also nation level order ssm srm becom oper within approxim one year worth acknowledg signific progress made less two year europ ambiti commit build genuin bank union regard fiscal polici euro area countri made substanti progress fiscal consolid past year euro area averag budget deficit halv compar peak level crisi creat room slow pace consolid howev must avoid pitfal complac order repeat mistak precrisi time euro area countri unravel past consolid achiev put high govern debt ratio downward trajectori medium term line stabil growth pact fiscal strategi ensur growthfriend composit consolid achiev better qualiti effici public servic respect welcom work present last two edit imf fiscal monitor identifi welldesign growthfriend consolid measur revenu expenditur side budget last although major progress made euro area countri need strengthen effort reform labour product market decis way order improv competit rais potenti growth generat employ opportun precis labour market need inclus flexibl resili product market includ servic made effici dynam addit countri take step toward improv busi environ growthfriend taxat bold effect implement measur crucial primarili interest individu countri time key strengthen function econom monetari union support global recoveri final also fulli congruent call imf manag director global polici agenda euro area make contribut reinvigor global growth employ reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en