Benoît Cœuré: Investing in Europe: towards a new convergence process,09-07-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,2814,"<p>***SummaryEconomic and Monetary Union (EMU) is a political triathlon. It requires resilience and resolve to perform well at all times in the three disciplines of a currency union: fiscal policy, economic policy and financial policy. EMU is a team effort. Only if every participant performs well can the euro area team be strong. This is the most important lesson from the crisis. The European economy is undergoing a moderate recovery, but complacency would be unwarranted. To really overcome the crisis, there are some remaining major challenges still to be faced. The euro area is not in a financial crisis anymore, but it must still contend with high debt, low growth and unacceptably high unemployment. These are reason enough to remain alert and continue acting. In recent years, economic policy-making rightfully focused on re-establishing the most important necessary condition for growth: stability. For companies to invest, for firms to hire, for households to consume, a stable economic environment is paramount.There are three relevant dimensions of economic stability: price stability, financial stability and macroeconomic stability, including the health of public finances. In all these areas, we have made substantial progress in recent years. During the crisis, the ECB took all appropriate measures to ensure that price stability provided an anchor in an uncertain and volatile economic environment. As for financial stability, the establishment of the European Stability Mechanism and the launch of banking union, with its Single Supervisory Mechanism and Single Resolution Mechanism, have been milestones in this respect. As a third dimension, the crisis has shown us the kind of existential threat to monetary union that can be brought about by the build-up of excessive imbalances, i.e. by the lack of fiscal and macroeconomic stability. New growth will not be generated by new debt. Sound fiscal policies are essential for growing out of debt. Therefore, the existing rules should be applied in a credible manner. That said, we cannot claim “mission accomplished”. What has been achieved so far is not enough. The answer to the remaining challenges could take the form of a “convergence process 2.0”, which should have an agreed timeline and milestones. But convergence can only be sustainable if it is associated with a commensurate deepening of integration, if it is a race towards best practice institutions and policies rather than towards mere nominal outcomes. In this context, structural reforms, if properly designed, lead to greater prosperity in each country and, at the same time, ensure greater resilience of EMU as a whole, thereby contributing to economic and social stability. Growth and stability are therefore mutually reinforcing.The convergence process should consist of two legs: on the one hand, it should underpin the convergence of economic policies and structures at the national level. On the other hand, it should facilitate joint action. At the national level, convergence implies that euro area governments need to step up structural reforms, in particular those which have the greatest efficiency gains given the relative distance to best practices. And policy-makers should pay due attention to ensure that the burden of the adjustment effort is shared fairly. The convergence in national structures could be complemented by joint action at the European level to increase investment and by the transfer of certain budgetary responsibilities to the European level with a view to strengthening risk-sharing within the currency union. But joint action can only occur once trust has been restored across countries and within countries, and the convergence process has advanced successfully. The level and the form of budgetary responsibilities, and how they are matched by appropriate democratic arrangements, should emanate from the political process.The biggest threat to the Single Market is not euro area integration: it would be euro area stagnation. The challenge of making the EMU work is far from over. Let’s get ready for the next stage of the race.***Ladies and gentlemen [1],Let me first of all thank The Economist for inviting me to this distinguished panel. Almost exactly ten years ago, the Olympic triathlon took place here in Vouliagmeni. On race day, the weather was as hot and as dry as it is today. The athletes needed to have two important attributes in order to be able to compete in a triathlon in these conditions: resilience to withstand the heat and commitment to endure all three disciplines with equal passion.Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) is a political triathlon. It requires resilience when the heat is on and it requires commitment and resolve for participants to perform well at all times in the three policy disciplines that mark a currency union: fiscal policy, economic policy and financial policy. But there is one important difference with a triathlon: EMU is a team effort. Only if every participant performs well can the euro area team be strong. This is the most important lesson from the crisis. Today, I want to discuss what this means in terms of the policy efforts that could be part of – as the panel title calls it – “the big rethink for a stronger Europe”. I will start with an analysis of the outstanding challenges – or the heat – that the euro area still faces. I will then outline what has already been achieved to bring stability and confidence back to the euro area. And third, I will argue that we need a credible long-term path towards more convergence and stronger resilience in the euro area so as to foster durable growth and ensure that the return of confidence is long-lasting; this is about the commitment to perform right up to the end. I refer to this long-term policy effort – not to qualify for participation in EMU, but to maintain successful participation in EMU – as “convergence process 2.0”, as I will explain in a moment.The European economy is undergoing a moderate recovery, but complacency would be unwarranted. To really overcome the crisis, there are some remaining major challenges still to be faced.First, the euro area’s debt has stabilised, but remains at high levels. [2] Second, euro area unemployment is still high and the youth are suffering disproportionately. [3] Finally, growth is only resuming at a slow pace. [4] Investment has been too low in Europe over the last 15 years, and the crisis has exacerbated this trend. At the same time, total factor productivity, which forms the basis of long-term growth, has also been disappointing. [5]If this trend continues over the long term, the euro area will not generate enough wealth to sustain the standard of living of its citizens and to ensure the sustainability of its social model, which is a defining feature of its identity.We sometimes ask ourselves how to keep the reform momentum going without the pressure of the financial crisis. [6] We would like to believe that what has been achieved since 2010 to strengthen EMU is enough to make it strong and sustainable and we can therefore claim “mission accomplished”. But the challenges I have just outlined provide enough of an answer. What has been achieved so far is not enough. The euro area is not in a financial crisis anymore, but it must still contend with high debt, low growth and unacceptably high unemployment. These are reason enough to remain alert and continue acting.For companies to invest, for firms to hire, for households to consume, a stable economic environment is paramount. If uncertainty reigns, economic activity suffers. In my view, there are three relevant dimensions of economic stability: price stability, financial stability and macroeconomic stability, including the health of public finances. In all these areas, we have made substantial progress in recent years. During the crisis, the ECB has taken all appropriate measures to ensure that price stability provided an anchor in an uncertain and volatile economic environment. Consistent with this principle, our recent decisions have aimed at addressing the risk of too long a period of low inflation and at ensuring that inflation expectations remain firmly anchored.As for financial stability, the crisis has shown us how the functioning of an economy becomes impaired without a well-functioning, robust financial system. This requires striking the right balance between insuring against crises, curbing risk-taking behaviour and mitigating moral hazard with a strong incentive framework. The establishment of the European Stability Mechanism and the launch of banking union, with its Single Supervisory Mechanism and Single Resolution Mechanism, have been milestones in this respect. The stabilisation and ongoing repair of the Greek banking system is another example.As a third dimension, the crisis has shown us the kind of existential threat to monetary union that can be brought about by the build-up of excessive imbalances, i.e. by the lack of fiscal and macroeconomic stability. The lesson drawn from this existential threat was that there was a need to reform economic governance. We should be very careful now not to roll back this achievement, in particular in the fiscal domain. New growth will not be generated by new debt. On the contrary: sound fiscal policies are essential for growing out of debt. Therefore, the existing rules should be applied, and they should not be stretched to a point where they would lose their credibility. There is built-in flexibility in the Stability and Growth Pact to account for the cost of major structural reforms – but it cannot be based on empty promises. The sequencing should be clear. First, reforms need to be adopted and implemented, and assessed independently by the European Commission. Then, the cost of such a reform, also independently assessed, could be taken into account under the Stability and Growth Pact, with due attention to the limited fiscal space provided by the high debt levels.Economic stability is a necessary condition for growth, but is not sufficient alone. For our economies to grow out of high debt and unemployment, and thereby ensure social stability, we need to do more.The challenges I outlined a minute ago call for an answer that goes beyond the necessary application of the existing rules of EMU. An answer that not only fosters stability and confidence today, but also in the future. An answer that gives EMU the institutional shape it needs to be a successful project in the long run. This answer could in my view take the form of what I call “convergence process 2.0”, which should have an agreed timeline and milestones. To run the political triathlon of EMU and perform well in all three disciplines, there needs to be a convergence of economic policies and structures. Moreover, joint action is of the essence. Let me be clear on what I mean by convergence. The crisis has shown the fragility of the convergence of economic outcomes; it can unravel quickly in the face of exogenous shocks. Convergence can only be sustainable if it is associated with a commensurate deepening of integration, if it is a race towards best practice institutions and policies rather than towards mere nominal outcomes. In this context, structural reforms, if properly designed, lead to greater prosperity in each country and, at the same time, ensure greater resilience of EMU as a whole, thereby contributing to economic and social stability. Growth and stability are therefore mutually reinforcing.With regard to  convergence in economic structures and policies, the starting point has to be decisive action at national level. Euro area governments need to step up structural reforms, in particular those which have the greatest efficiency gains given the relative distance to best practices. [7] Policy-makers should pay due attention to ensure that the burden of the adjustment effort is shared fairly. The perception of fairness of reforms in the national context is a key ingredient in their success. Fighting tax evasion, rent seeking and corruption as well as increasing transparency are key examples.These efforts at the national level should be complemented by structural reforms at the European level, aimed at deepening the Single Market, the cement that holds all our economies together. This is particularly true of the Single Market for capital, where a lot can still be done to enhance both risk-sharing and allocative efficiency. [8] Structural reforms at the national level could also go beyond the country-specific perspective in the areas of direct relevance for the smooth functioning of EMU. In these areas, convergence could be embedded in a binding European effort, based on benchmarks to be met by all euro area Member States. This process would be a race to the top and would close the gap to the frontier in terms of competitiveness and resilience. For this process to be fully effective and legitimate, it would have to entail the gradual pooling of sovereignty in these policy areas and be based on the Community method with due involvement of the European Parliament. The convergence in national structures could be complemented by joint action at the European level in two respects. Complementing regulatory initiatives, there could be a joint European effort to increase investment levels by better channelling private savings to investment and by coordinating available public investment programmes. Beyond this, one could envisage joint European investment in public goods such as network industries and R&D, as a way to bolster Europe’s growth potential and to even out drops in public investment in economies hit by shocks. Yet, this should be achieved by prioritising spending and should not undermine efforts that remain necessary to bring down debt levels.In the longer term, the convergence process could culminate in the transfer of certain budgetary responsibilities to the European level with a view to strengthening risk-sharing within the currency union. But let me add an important note of caution. This can only occur once trust has been restored across countries and within countries, i.e. after growth has resumed, unemployment and inequalities have receded, and economies have sufficiently converged. What we are talking about is a new social contract among European countries. This can only be agreed under the veil of ignorance [9], i.e. under the expectation that participating economies, in their diversity, have comparable strengths and weaknesses. And that is why such a new social contract can only happen at the end of a new convergence process.As to which level which budgetary responsibilities are allocated, and how they are matched by appropriate democratic arrangements, I believe this is ultimately a political decision. It should emanate from a political process, and I note that other federations with more developed forms of political union such as Switzerland or the United States have found very different answers to this question.Further integration within the euro area raises the difficult issue of the relationship with the “outs”. Adequate safeguards have to ensure full consistency with the Single Market, which is the European Union’s most valuable achievement. However, while such safeguards will have a bearing on the design of euro area integration, they cannot change its direction. The biggest threat to the Single Market is not euro area integration: it would be euro area stagnation. [10]Ladies and gentlemen,The triathlon competitions here in Vouliagmeni ended a decade ago. The challenge of making EMU work is far from over. In fact, we are now just out of the water. Let’s get ready for the bike race and not forget about the running that will come later.Many thanks for your attention, and I am now looking forward to our debate.[1]I would like to thank Lucas Guttenberg, Jean-Francois Jamet and Marion Salines for their contributions. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.[2]In 2013 public and private sector debt reached respectively 95.1% and 168.0% of GDP. The debt level is especially high in some Member States: for instance, public debt stood at 175.1% of GDP in Greece and 132.6% in Italy, while private sector debt amounted to 319% of GDP in Ireland and 252% in Portugal.[3]Euro area unemployment rose to 12.0% in 2013. Youth unemployment reached 24.0% in the euro area and increased dramatically in Greece and Spain to 58.3% and 55.5% respectively. [4]Euro area GDP is expected to recover at a pace of 1% in 2014 and 1.7% in 2015 according to the latest ECB staff projections.[5]Total investment in the euro area has shrunk by almost 20% since the peak in economic activity in 2008. In addition, total factor productivity has also been disappointing in the euro area since 2000: it grew by 0.45% annually from 2000 to 2007 before receding by 0.47% annually between 2007 and 2012 (source: Ameco database, European Commission).[6]See Barroso, J.M., “Remarks by President Barroso on the Country Specific Recommendations 2014”, speech given in Brussels on 2 June 2014.[7]Cheptea, C. and Velculescu, D., “A Disaggregated Approach to Prioritizing Structural Reforms for Growth and Employment”, in Schindler, M., Berger, H., Bakker, B. and Spilimbergo, A. (eds.), Jobs and Growth: Supporting the European Recovery, IMF, 2014.[8]See Cœuré, B., “Ein Binnenmarkt für Kapital”, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 30 June 2014.[9]See Rawls, J., A Theory of Justice, Harvard University Press, 1971.[10]See Cœuré, B., “Is Eurozone governance fit for purpose?”, speech at a dinner organised by the Centre for European Reform, London, 30 January 2014.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",summaryeconom monetari union emu polit triathlon requir resili resolv perform well time three disciplin currenc union fiscal polici econom polici financi polici emu team effort everi particip perform well euro area team strong import lesson crisi european economi undergo moder recoveri complac would unwarr realli overcom crisi remain major challeng still face euro area financi crisi anymor must still contend high debt low growth unaccept high unemploy reason enough remain alert continu act recent year econom policymak right focus reestablish import necessari condit growth stabil compani invest firm hire household consum stabl econom environ paramount three relev dimens econom stabil price stabil financi stabil macroeconom stabil includ health public financ area made substanti progress recent year crisi ecb took appropri measur ensur price stabil provid anchor uncertain volatil econom environ financi stabil establish european stabil mechan launch bank union singl supervisori mechan singl resolut mechan mileston respect third dimens crisi shown us kind existenti threat monetari union brought buildup excess imbal e lack fiscal macroeconom stabil new growth generat new debt sound fiscal polici essenti grow debt therefor exist rule appli credibl manner said cannot claim mission accomplish achiev far enough answer remain challeng could take form converg process agre timelin mileston converg sustain associ commensur deepen integr race toward best practic institut polici rather toward mere nomin outcom context structur reform proper design lead greater prosper countri time ensur greater resili emu whole therebi contribut econom social stabil growth stabil therefor mutual reinforc converg process consist two leg one hand underpin converg econom polici structur nation level hand facilit joint action nation level converg impli euro area govern need step structur reform particular greatest effici gain given relat distanc best practic policymak pay due attent ensur burden adjust effort share fair converg nation structur could complement joint action european level increas invest transfer certain budgetari respons european level view strengthen riskshar within currenc union joint action occur trust restor across countri within countri converg process advanc success level form budgetari respons match appropri democrat arrang eman polit process biggest threat singl market euro area integr would euro area stagnat challeng make emu work far let get readi next stage race ladi gentlemen let first thank economist invit distinguish panel almost exact ten year ago olymp triathlon took place vouliagmeni race day weather hot dri today athlet need two import attribut order abl compet triathlon condit resili withstand heat commit endur three disciplin equal passion econom monetari union emu polit triathlon requir resili heat requir commit resolv particip perform well time three polici disciplin mark currenc union fiscal polici econom polici financi polici one import differ triathlon emu team effort everi particip perform well euro area team strong import lesson crisi today want discuss mean term polici effort could part panel titl call big rethink stronger europ start analysi outstand challeng heat euro area still face outlin alreadi achiev bring stabil confid back euro area third argu need credibl longterm path toward converg stronger resili euro area foster durabl growth ensur return confid longlast commit perform right end refer longterm polici effort qualifi particip emu maintain success particip emu converg process explain moment european economi undergo moder recoveri complac would unwarr realli overcom crisi remain major challeng still face first euro area debt stabilis remain high level second euro area unemploy still high youth suffer disproportion final growth resum slow pace invest low europ last year crisi exacerb trend time total factor product form basi longterm growth also disappoint trend continu long term euro area generat enough wealth sustain standard live citizen ensur sustain social model defin featur ident sometim ask keep reform momentum go without pressur financi crisi would like believ achiev sinc strengthen emu enough make strong sustain therefor claim mission accomplish challeng outlin provid enough answer achiev far enough euro area financi crisi anymor must still contend high debt low growth unaccept high unemploy reason enough remain alert continu act compani invest firm hire household consum stabl econom environ paramount uncertainti reign econom activ suffer view three relev dimens econom stabil price stabil financi stabil macroeconom stabil includ health public financ area made substanti progress recent year crisi ecb taken appropri measur ensur price stabil provid anchor uncertain volatil econom environ consist principl recent decis aim address risk long period low inflat ensur inflat expect remain firm anchor financi stabil crisi shown us function economi becom impair without wellfunct robust financi system requir strike right balanc insur crise curb risktak behaviour mitig moral hazard strong incent framework establish european stabil mechan launch bank union singl supervisori mechan singl resolut mechan mileston respect stabilis ongo repair greek bank system anoth exampl third dimens crisi shown us kind existenti threat monetari union brought buildup excess imbal e lack fiscal macroeconom stabil lesson drawn existenti threat need reform econom govern care roll back achiev particular fiscal domain new growth generat new debt contrari sound fiscal polici essenti grow debt therefor exist rule appli stretch point would lose credibl builtin flexibl stabil growth pact account cost major structur reform cannot base empti promis sequenc clear first reform need adopt implement assess independ european commiss cost reform also independ assess could taken account stabil growth pact due attent limit fiscal space provid high debt level econom stabil necessari condit growth suffici alon economi grow high debt unemploy therebi ensur social stabil need challeng outlin minut ago call answer goe beyond necessari applic exist rule emu answer foster stabil confid today also futur answer give emu institut shape need success project long run answer could view take form call converg process agre timelin mileston run polit triathlon emu perform well three disciplin need converg econom polici structur moreov joint action essenc let clear mean converg crisi shown fragil converg econom outcom unravel quick face exogen shock converg sustain associ commensur deepen integr race toward best practic institut polici rather toward mere nomin outcom context structur reform proper design lead greater prosper countri time ensur greater resili emu whole therebi contribut econom social stabil growth stabil therefor mutual reinforc regard converg econom structur polici start point decis action nation level euro area govern need step structur reform particular greatest effici gain given relat distanc best practic policymak pay due attent ensur burden adjust effort share fair percept fair reform nation context key ingredi success fight tax evas rent seek corrupt well increas transpar key exampl effort nation level complement structur reform european level aim deepen singl market cement hold economi togeth particular true singl market capit lot still done enhanc riskshar alloc effici structur reform nation level could also go beyond countryspecif perspect area direct relev smooth function emu area converg could embed bind european effort base benchmark met euro area member state process would race top would close gap frontier term competit resili process fulli effect legitim would entail gradual pool sovereignti polici area base communiti method due involv european parliament converg nation structur could complement joint action european level two respect complement regulatori initi could joint european effort increas invest level better channel privat save invest coordin avail public invest programm beyond one could envisag joint european invest public good network industri r d way bolster europ growth potenti even drop public invest economi hit shock yet achiev prioritis spend undermin effort remain necessari bring debt level longer term converg process could culmin transfer certain budgetari respons european level view strengthen riskshar within currenc union let add import note caution occur trust restor across countri within countri e growth resum unemploy inequ reced economi suffici converg talk new social contract among european countri agre veil ignor e expect particip economi divers compar strength weak new social contract happen end new converg process level budgetari respons alloc match appropri democrat arrang believ ultim polit decis eman polit process note feder develop form polit union switzerland unit state found differ answer question integr within euro area rais difficult issu relationship out adequ safeguard ensur full consist singl market european union valuabl achiev howev safeguard bear design euro area integr cannot chang direct biggest threat singl market euro area integr would euro area stagnat ladi gentlemen triathlon competit vouliagmeni end decad ago challeng make emu work far fact water let get readi bike race forget run come later mani thank attent look forward debat would like thank luca guttenberg jeanfrancoi jamet marion salin contribut remain sole respons opinion contain herein public privat sector debt reach respect gdp debt level especi high member state instanc public debt stood gdp greec itali privat sector debt amount gdp ireland portug euro area unemploy rose youth unemploy reach euro area increas dramat greec spain respect euro area gdp expect recov pace accord latest ecb staff project total invest euro area shrunk almost sinc peak econom activ addit total factor product also disappoint euro area sinc grew annual reced annual sourc ameco databas european commiss see barroso j m remark presid barroso countri specif recommend speech given brussel june cheptea c velculescu d disaggreg approach priorit structur reform growth employ schindler m berger h bakker b spilimbergo ed job growth support european recoveri imf see cœuré b ein binnenmarkt für kapit frankfurt allgemein zeitung june see rawl j theori justic harvard univers press see cœuré b eurozon govern fit purpos speech dinner organis centr european reform london januari reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en