Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The euro – benefits and challenges,26-11-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,3001,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen, Let me first thank the organisers for inviting me to this conference on Poland and the euro. As you know, in just over one month’s time, the euro area will be expanded for the third time since its start in 1999, this time with Cyprus and Malta, taking the total number of participating countries to 15. As more countries complete their convergence processes and join the euro area, our experience and knowledge are growing as regards not only the convergence process but also how participation in the euro area changes the economic conditions for the individual country. As all countries need to have an open and sincere debate about the pros and cons of the euro, a project which is at the core of European integration, I am pleased to share my views with you today. Poland has been at the core of European history since a long time. Being myself from Vienna, I know very well the importance of the help of King Jan III Sobieski in ending the siege of Vienna in 1683, for the subsequent history of my country. In my speech, I would like to address the issue of experiences gained so far in the euro area by discussing the benefits and challenges of adopting the euro. I would then like to say a few words about the formal convergence process and the role of the European Central Bank (ECB) in the examination of countries’ progress with convergence. Finally, I would like to concentrate on a few specific future policy challenges, both for the euro area as a whole and for the individual countries.As regards the benefits of euro area membership, these can be seen from two perspectives: from the perspective of the individual country and from the perspective of the euro area as a whole. The convergence process for euro area entry is aimed at ensuring that participation in the euro area is beneficial for both. Starting with the euro area, Monetary Union represents the completion of the Internal Market in the EU, providing full price and cost transparency to the Single Market for goods, services, labour and capital. The euro has brought exchange rate stability within the area, which supports trade and enables economies of scale, thereby providing the conditions for a more efficient allocation of resources. For the ordinary citizen, the most striking advantage is of course that they no longer need to exchange currencies when travelling in the euro area. In addition, the euro has brought monetary stability, with low inflation and a convergence of long-term interest rates to the low levels prevailing in the countries that had the highest monetary policy credibility before the euro was introduced. This was not an obvious outcome. In fact, given differences across countries and the complexity of the task at hand, many commentators doubted whether the euro area could ever achieve the high degree of monetary stability and credibility of some of its legacy currencies. Moreover, despite significant economic shocks over the years, due for instance to oil price and financial market developments, inflation and inflation expectations have remained closely anchored to price stability, as defined by the ECB. Price stability, low inflation expectations and low long-term interest rates are key objectives for monetary policy, as they provide the best support for sustainable economic growth and employment. For the individual countries, however, the story could be somewhat different, given that favourable developments in the euro area could mask a considerable level of diversity among countries. In recent years, there has been much discussion about divergences across countries in the euro area. However, while inflation and growth differentials between euro area countries are not insignificant, they have not been unusually large since the launch of the euro in comparison with other large currency areas, particularly the United States. Moreover, the dispersion of inflation rates is substantially smaller that that experienced in the previous decade, and the dispersion of the growth rates across countries has declined somewhat over the past 20 years. However, the persistence of inflation and growth differentials across countries, in the sense that it is the same countries which persistently exhibit developments above or below the euro area average, may suggest that the underlying adjustment mechanisms in the euro area economies are functioning only gradually and not as fast as might be desirable. This, in turn, could have adverse implications for activity and employment. Accordingly, appropriate reforms and economic policies are warranted. I will come back to this point later. The main benefit of the euro for the individual country, especially for small and open economies, relates to its potential to promote trade. By eliminating exchange rate volatility and providing complete price transparency, the euro has greatly enhanced the forces that lead to economic activity to be conducted across borders. It has been shown in a number of studies[ [1]] that trade integration has increased rapidly among countries that have introduced the euro, with a significant increase in intra-euro area trade and foreign direct investment (FDI). Indeed, exports and imports of goods within the euro area rose from about 27% of GDP in 1999 to around 32% in 2006. This rise in cross-border trade may to a certain extent be due to the introduction of the single currency, the increased price and cost transparency it helped foster and the absence of exchange rate risk. The increasing interdependence of euro area countries is also confirmed by the considerable growth in intra-euro area FDI flows, with the sum of inflows and outflows in 2006 accounting for around 5% of euro area GDP – at par with extra-euro area FDI flows. Intra-euro area FDI stocks have thus grown considerably, doubling from 14% of euro area GDP in 1999 to around 28% in 2006. At the same time, the increase in trade with the rest of the world has recently been even greater than the increase in intra-euro area trade, with the following figures showing that the euro area is very open. From 1999 to 2006 extra-euro area exports and imports of goods rose to 33% of euro area GDP, from about 24%. The stronger growth of extra-euro area trade has mainly been due to the more sustained growth in world GDP, an increase in global trade integration and the very sizeable increase in trade with China, emerging Asia and the new EU Member States that joined the Union in May 2004. Finally, a factor which may be particularly important for small, open economies is that adopting the euro may provide stronger protection against international financial disturbances. Such disturbances have often had a disproportional effect on smaller economies, raising the risks of external shocks. In sum, I would argue that the introduction of the euro has been a great success, showing that clarity of vision, based on sound economic arguments and determined planning and implementation, can yield important results in adapting our economies to the future global challenges. Nevertheless, there are also challenges related to participation in the euro area which should not be forgotten. As I touched upon earlier, a potential challenge or risk involved in adopting the euro relates to the question of whether the economies that share the euro are relatively similar in terms of business cycles and do not display significant divergences. With monetary policy focusing on the euro area, divergences would place greater demands on domestic fiscal and structural policies as they would need to play a key role in the adjustment process. Divergences may arise from radically different economic structures or from differences in economic policies, although the latter should be less of a problem given that all EU countries are committed to price stability, sound public finances and the Lisbon Agenda for promoting growth and employment. Once the euro has been adopted, adjustments to economic problems, external shocks and changes in competitive positions need to be made other than via domestically set short-term interest rates and fluctuations in the exchange rate. Each country consequently needs to assess the likelihood of being exposed to country-specific shocks to which a euro area-wide monetary policy will not be able to react. In particular, it is important to avoid home-made competitiveness problems, for instance through too high wage increases in relation to productivity gains. At present, the business cycles of the euro area and most EU countries are highly correlated, and the correlation can be expected to increase further given the growing trade integration and the pursuit of stability-oriented economic policies.Some differences between countries will, however, always exist and are a natural feature in all currency areas, reflecting regional adjustments to changes in demand and supply. As long as markets are free to adjust to the changing economic conditions, country differentials should largely be of a transitory nature. This underlines the importance of efficient and flexible labour and product markets which react in a timely manner and thereby moderate the impact of divergent developments on growth and employment. This is also why there is a strong focus in the EU and the euro area on structural reforms, as reflected for instance in the Lisbon process, and on prudent fiscal policies which are sufficiently flexible to provide buffers for bad times. The pressure to reform and improve the working of the domestic economy does not end with the convergence process for euro area entry. Let me briefly also touch upon the challenges related to the adoption of the euro. As you are aware, the Treaty establishing the European Community specifies a number of nominal convergence criteria which must be fulfilled, including the need to deliver both price and exchange rate stability. This may be complicated in countries which are also undergoing a process of real convergence, which tends to put upward pressure on either inflation or the exchange rate. This suggests that the timing of euro area entry needs to be carefully considered, also in view of the fact that a key challenge relates to the sustainability of convergence. Only when a country is certain to be able to maintain simultaneously an environment of low inflation and a stable exchange rate can it be confident of functioning smoothly within Monetary Union. These challenges relate to the country as a whole; the challenge for individual citizens is to adapt to a whole new monetary reference system. While this may take time for older generations, who are used to what is cheap and expensive in the terms of the old currency, it is striking how fast the changeover goes for the younger generations. Unfamiliarity can lead to situations where companies try to take advantage of the euro cash changeover by raising prices. We have had this debate in many countries, and it remains a challenge for public authorities and consumers to scrutinise price-setting behaviour closely and act against obvious attempts to take advantage of the situation. Finally, a key challenge for all countries lies in an open and transparent debate with the general public on the implications of euro area participation and the necessary steps to be taken towards this goal.. Surveys show that there is a small majority of citizens in the new EU Member States (53%; and 52% in Poland) believe that adopting the euro will have positive consequences for their countries. Fewer people feel happy about the prospect of a future changeover (48%; and 46% in Poland). Sometimes, participation in Monetary Union is viewed by sceptics in terms of a loss of sovereignty. However, the room for manoeuvre for independent national policy-making in a highly integrated world economy is debatable in any case. For instance, it is clear that there are limits to the scope for national monetary policy to deliver both price and exchange rate stability in a world with free capital movements. Let me now turn to the formal process for adopting the euro. The important step towards adoption of the euro after a country has joined the EU is to join the exchange rate mechanism, ERM II. According to the Treaty requirements, a country must observe the normal fluctuation margins in ERM II for at least two years. In particular, it should not devalue its central rate on its own initiative. Convergence reports by the European Commission and the ECB – the next regular report will be in 2008 – examine progress with convergence with reference to criteria relating to inflation, public finances, exchange rate and long-term interest rate developments, as well as legal convergence. These findings are presented to the EU Council, which takes the final decision on which countries fulfil the conditions for adopting the euro. The Council also decides the final conversion rate to the euro. It is then that the technical preparations for euro adoption can start. The entry of new countries into the euro area is determined by the conditions laid down by the Treaty. They are applied in an equal fashion to all candidates. While each country prepares for euro area entry at a pace in line with its own economic conditions, all EU Member States, apart from Denmark and the United Kingdom, are committed to strive to fulfil the convergence criteria as soon as possible and adopt the euro thereafter. Let me now turn to some future challenges which I consider will be of increasing importance in the coming years. It is clear that a lot of progress has been made within the EU on finding a successful institutional framework for macroeconomic stability and sustainability. It is, however, true that a number of countries – including Poland – are still struggling, in particular with finding a sustainable path for public finances. These challenges are even more acute if we take into account the challenge of an ageing population which will very soon start to weigh on public finances. This consequently remains the key priority in many countries. To take another perspective, we can also see that the pressures from globalisation and technological change force us to think hard about the long-term competitiveness of our economies. While we have had a lively debate in recent years about the reasons for the relatively low level of productivity growth in the euro area, the remedies are still not easy to formulate. For many of the new EU Member States, this question is of particular relevance, especially in light of the fact that gains realised from a low starting position – stemming from the upgrading of technology and product quality through privatisation, restructuring and FDI inflows – may not be easy to sustain over time. More sophisticated measures may consequently be needed to bring about a new wave of restructuring and technological progress in order to keep up with competitor economies. In this endeavour, issues such as good corporate governance, efficient competition, research and development and education policies will be increasingly important. An important element for the Internal Market in the EU and the Lisbon Agenda is a well-functioning labour market. In recent years we have witnessed an increase in cross-border labour migration in Europe, especially since the enlargement of the EU in 2004. Most worker migration has so far been of a temporary nature. This has been facilitated by advances in information and communication technology that have made these labour flows very flexible, to the point that we have difficulty registering the extent of labour flows and assessing the economic impact. The temporary nature of migration also implies that a great amount of knowledge and wealth is returned to the countries of origin, thereby supporting the catching-up process in these countries. In the short run, however, labour migration also constitutes a challenge to the countries of origin. A large proportion of the workers leaving the country are highly educated, which aggravates labour market bottlenecks and skill mismatches. In addition, labour demand has been rising rapidly. As we have seen, this normally results in rising wage pressures, despite often high remaining levels of unemployment. These developments point to a need to review national policies on factors affecting the labour market, such as education, early retirement schemes and social transfer systems, infrastructure, housing and the use of foreign workers, which have the potential to increase labour supply and flexibility.An additional challenge relates to the development of the financial sector, which has not been the focus on my speech today. I will therefore only briefly point out one issue: the share of foreign currency lending remains high in many of the central and eastern European countries. The resulting currency mismatches, particularly of households, is, in my view, an important concern from a financial stability perspective. Indeed, in many countries, borrowers appear to underestimate the risk of exchange rate changes between the domestic currency and the currency in which they borrow. While most of the foreign currency borrowing is in euro, other currencies such as the Swiss franc have increasingly been gaining share.Let me finally say that in many of these challenges, Poland is well placed to draw benefits and lessons from other countries and contribute to a deeper exchange of views based on its own experiences. Recent years have seen important improvements in the Polish economy, with real GDP growth rising to above 6% last year and possibly this year. This upswing has been led by robust domestic demand, rising FDI inflows and a markedly improved situation on the labour market with rapidly falling unemployment, although to some extent this reflects increased early retirement, emigration and a growing number of students. Important progress has been made in terms of inflation, although more recently temporary shocks to food prices have put upward pressure on inflation, and wages have accelerated. As I have discussed, further efforts are needed in view of future euro area membership, in terms of both successful preparations and successful participation. Moreover, steps towards a more flexible domestic economy with a stable macroeconomic framework will in themselves be conducive to a rapid catching-up process and improvement in living standards. I am sure there will be many reasons to come back to these issues in a not too distant future here in Poland.Thank you for your attention.[1] For a review of the literature, see R. Baldwin, “The euro’s trade effects”, ECB Working Paper No 594, March 2006.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen let first thank organis invit confer poland euro know one month time euro area expand third time sinc start time cyprus malta take total number particip countri countri complet converg process join euro area experi knowledg grow regard converg process also particip euro area chang econom condit individu countri countri need open sincer debat pros con euro project core european integr pleas share view today poland core european histori sinc long time vienna know well import help king iii sobieski end sieg vienna subsequ histori countri speech would like address issu experi gain far euro area discuss benefit challeng adopt euro would like say word formal converg process role european central bank ecb examin countri progress converg final would like concentr specif futur polici challeng euro area whole individu countri regard benefit euro area membership seen two perspect perspect individu countri perspect euro area whole converg process euro area entri aim ensur particip euro area benefici start euro area monetari union repres complet intern market eu provid full price cost transpar singl market good servic labour capit euro brought exchang rate stabil within area support trade enabl economi scale therebi provid condit effici alloc resourc ordinari citizen strike advantag cours longer need exchang currenc travel euro area addit euro brought monetari stabil low inflat converg longterm interest rate low level prevail countri highest monetari polici credibl euro introduc obvious outcom fact given differ across countri complex task hand mani comment doubt whether euro area could ever achiev high degre monetari stabil credibl legaci currenc moreov despit signific econom shock year due instanc oil price financi market develop inflat inflat expect remain close anchor price stabil defin ecb price stabil low inflat expect low longterm interest rate key object monetari polici provid best support sustain econom growth employ individu countri howev stori could somewhat differ given favour develop euro area could mask consider level divers among countri recent year much discuss diverg across countri euro area howev inflat growth differenti euro area countri insignific unusu larg sinc launch euro comparison larg currenc area particular unit state moreov dispers inflat rate substanti smaller experienc previous decad dispers growth rate across countri declin somewhat past year howev persist inflat growth differenti across countri sens countri persist exhibit develop euro area averag may suggest under adjust mechan euro area economi function gradual fast might desir turn could advers implic activ employ accord appropri reform econom polici warrant come back point later main benefit euro individu countri especi small open economi relat potenti promot trade elimin exchang rate volatil provid complet price transpar euro great enhanc forc lead econom activ conduct across border shown number studi trade integr increas rapid among countri introduc euro signific increas intraeuro area trade foreign direct invest fdi inde export import good within euro area rose gdp around rise crossbord trade may certain extent due introduct singl currenc increas price cost transpar help foster absenc exchang rate risk increas interdepend euro area countri also confirm consider growth intraeuro area fdi flow sum inflow outflow account around euro area gdp par extraeuro area fdi flow intraeuro area fdi stock thus grown consider doubl euro area gdp around time increas trade rest world recent even greater increas intraeuro area trade follow figur show euro area open extraeuro area export import good rose euro area gdp stronger growth extraeuro area trade main due sustain growth world gdp increas global trade integr sizeabl increas trade china emerg asia new eu member state join union may final factor may particular import small open economi adopt euro may provid stronger protect intern financi disturb disturb often disproport effect smaller economi rais risk extern shock sum would argu introduct euro great success show clariti vision base sound econom argument determin plan implement yield import result adapt economi futur global challeng nevertheless also challeng relat particip euro area forgotten touch upon earlier potenti challeng risk involv adopt euro relat question whether economi share euro relat similar term busi cycl display signific diverg monetari polici focus euro area diverg would place greater demand domest fiscal structur polici would need play key role adjust process diverg may aris radic differ econom structur differ econom polici although latter less problem given eu countri commit price stabil sound public financ lisbon agenda promot growth employ euro adopt adjust econom problem extern shock chang competit posit need made via domest set shortterm interest rate fluctuat exchang rate countri consequ need assess likelihood expos countryspecif shock euro areawid monetari polici abl react particular import avoid homemad competit problem instanc high wage increas relat product gain present busi cycl euro area eu countri high correl correl expect increas given grow trade integr pursuit stabilityori econom polici differ countri howev alway exist natur featur currenc area reflect region adjust chang demand suppli long market free adjust chang econom condit countri differenti larg transitori natur underlin import effici flexibl labour product market react time manner therebi moder impact diverg develop growth employ also strong focus eu euro area structur reform reflect instanc lisbon process prudent fiscal polici suffici flexibl provid buffer bad time pressur reform improv work domest economi end converg process euro area entri let briefli also touch upon challeng relat adopt euro awar treati establish european communiti specifi number nomin converg criteria must fulfil includ need deliv price exchang rate stabil may complic countri also undergo process real converg tend put upward pressur either inflat exchang rate suggest time euro area entri need care consid also view fact key challeng relat sustain converg countri certain abl maintain simultan environ low inflat stabl exchang rate confid function smooth within monetari union challeng relat countri whole challeng individu citizen adapt whole new monetari refer system may take time older generat use cheap expens term old currenc strike fast changeov goe younger generat unfamiliar lead situat compani tri take advantag euro cash changeov rais price debat mani countri remain challeng public author consum scrutinis priceset behaviour close act obvious attempt take advantag situat final key challeng countri lie open transpar debat general public implic euro area particip necessari step taken toward goal survey show small major citizen new eu member state poland believ adopt euro posit consequ countri fewer peopl feel happi prospect futur changeov poland sometim particip monetari union view sceptic term loss sovereignti howev room manoeuvr independ nation policymak high integr world economi debat case instanc clear limit scope nation monetari polici deliv price exchang rate stabil world free capit movement let turn formal process adopt euro import step toward adopt euro countri join eu join exchang rate mechan erm ii accord treati requir countri must observ normal fluctuat margin erm ii least two year particular devalu central rate initi converg report european commiss ecb next regular report examin progress converg refer criteria relat inflat public financ exchang rate longterm interest rate develop well legal converg find present eu council take final decis countri fulfil condit adopt euro council also decid final convers rate euro technic prepar euro adopt start entri new countri euro area determin condit laid treati appli equal fashion candid countri prepar euro area entri pace line econom condit eu member state apart denmark unit kingdom commit strive fulfil converg criteria soon possibl adopt euro thereaft let turn futur challeng consid increas import come year clear lot progress made within eu find success institut framework macroeconom stabil sustain howev true number countri includ poland still struggl particular find sustain path public financ challeng even acut take account challeng age popul soon start weigh public financ consequ remain key prioriti mani countri take anoth perspect also see pressur globalis technolog chang forc us think hard longterm competit economi live debat recent year reason relat low level product growth euro area remedi still easi formul mani new eu member state question particular relev especi light fact gain realis low start posit stem upgrad technolog product qualiti privatis restructur fdi inflow may easi sustain time sophist measur may consequ need bring new wave restructur technolog progress order keep competitor economi endeavour issu good corpor govern effici competit research develop educ polici increas import import element intern market eu lisbon agenda wellfunct labour market recent year wit increas crossbord labour migrat europ especi sinc enlarg eu worker migrat far temporari natur facilit advanc inform communic technolog made labour flow flexibl point difficulti regist extent labour flow assess econom impact temporari natur migrat also impli great amount knowledg wealth return countri origin therebi support catchingup process countri short run howev labour migrat also constitut challeng countri origin larg proport worker leav countri high educ aggrav labour market bottleneck skill mismatch addit labour demand rise rapid seen normal result rise wage pressur despit often high remain level unemploy develop point need review nation polici factor affect labour market educ earli retir scheme social transfer system infrastructur hous use foreign worker potenti increas labour suppli flexibl addit challeng relat develop financi sector focus speech today therefor briefli point one issu share foreign currenc lend remain high mani central eastern european countri result currenc mismatch particular household view import concern financi stabil perspect inde mani countri borrow appear underestim risk exchang rate chang domest currenc currenc borrow foreign currenc borrow euro currenc swiss franc increas gain share let final say mani challeng poland well place draw benefit lesson countri contribut deeper exchang view base experi recent year seen import improv polish economi real gdp growth rise last year possibl year upsw led robust domest demand rise fdi inflow mark improv situat labour market rapid fall unemploy although extent reflect increas earli retir emigr grow number student import progress made term inflat although recent temporari shock food price put upward pressur inflat wage acceler discuss effort need view futur euro area membership term success prepar success particip moreov step toward flexibl domest economi stabl macroeconom framework conduc rapid catchingup process improv live standard sure mani reason come back issu distant futur poland thank attent review literatur see r baldwin euro trade effect ecb work paper march reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en