Mario Draghi: Introductory remarks at the Finnish parliament,27-11-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,2011,"<p>***SummaryIn his speech at the Finnish Parliament the President highlighted that, over the past crisis years, the ECB has acted forcefully to safeguard price stability and to contribute to financial stability in the euro area as a whole.In particular, the ECB has taken several non-standard measures to ensure the transmission of its monetary policy to the economy. The latest unconventional measures announced by the ECB (the targeted long term refinancing operations (TLTROs), and the covered bond and ABS purchase programmes) will have a sizeable impact on our balance sheet, which we expect to move towards its early 2012 dimension. This will ensure the necessary degree of monetary accommodation and contribute to a gradual recovery and a return of inflation to levels closer to below, but close to, 2%. If, however, it becomes necessary to further address risks of too prolonged a period of low inflation, the Governing Council is unanimous in its commitment to using additional unconventional instruments within its mandate.Accountability and transparency are the essential elements balancing the independence of a central bank, especially in times where unconventional measures are being taken. The ECB regularly publishes a variety of data on the execution of monetary policy operations and the liquidity conditions of the Eurosystem. (i.e. the SMP, the Covered Bonds Programmes and the ABS Purchase Programme portfolios). Additionally, the Governing Council committed to the publication of an account of monetary policy discussions. As regards fiscal policy and structural reforms, while the Stability and Growth Pact should remain the anchor for confidence in sustainable public finances, a comprehensive strategy is needed to put the euro area economy back on track. This involves further sharing of sovereignty, i.e a leap forward from common rules to common institutions. The upcoming report commissioned by the Euro Summit on the future of economic governance will present a good starting point for further reflection.***Honourable Members of Parliament,Ladies and Gentlemen,I would like to thank you warmly for having invited me to address you today. This is a good opportunity for me to explain the policies of the European Central Bank (ECB) and to listen to your concerns and questions. I am looking forward to a fruitful exchange of views today.To lay the ground for our discussion, I will focus on three topics: the ECB’s monetary policy (even though I will not elaborate on possible upcoming measures as we are in the so-called “quiet” period during which members of the Governing Council are expected to remain silent on this issue), the ECB’s accountability framework and transparency, and the progress towards building a deeper economic and monetary union (EMU).Let me first turn to economic developments in the euro area.We have seen a weakening in the euro area’s growth momentum over the summer and the euro area economic outlook is surrounded by a number of downside risks. Also, most recent forecasts by private and public sector institutions have been revised downwards. Our expectation for a moderate recovery in the next years still remains in place, reflecting our monetary policy measures, the ongoing improvements in financial conditions, and the progress made vis-à-vis structural reforms and fiscal consolidation. But the recovery will likely be dampened by high unemployment, sizeable unutilised capacity, and the necessary balance sheet adjustments.Inflation in the euro area remains very low, standing at 0.4% in October. In the light of the recent sharp fall in oil prices, and taking into account prevailing futures prices for energy, inflation is expected to remain at around current low levels over the coming months, before increasing gradually during 2015 and 2016. Meanwhile, we are facing continuously sluggish money and credit dynamics – even if the growth rates of some key aggregates have edged up in recent months.During the past crisis years, the ECB has acted forcefully to safeguard price stability and to contribute to financial stability in the euro area as a whole. In particular, we have taken several non-standard measures to ensure the transmission of our monetary policy to the economy. We provided the euro area banking system with unprecedented funding, including the full allotment - at fixed rates - of banks’ demand for liquidity. We also communicated our readiness to undertake Outright Monetary Transactions with a view towards restoring the monetary transmission mechanism which was impaired by distress in sovereign bond markets. While these measures have been successful in improving banks’ access to private credit and countering financial fragmentation, broader financing conditions – foremost the cost of borrowing from banks – have been exceptionally sluggish in responding to the monetary policy accommodation that was introduced. As a consequence, monetary and credit dynamics have followed a protracted, negative trend until very recently. Against this backdrop, and in view of a persistently weak inflation outlook, we decided in June and then in September to adopt a number of monetary policy measures. With these monetary policy decisions, we have moved from a monetary policy framework based predominantly on passive provision of liquidity to a more active and controlled management of our balance sheet.In September, we cut the key ECB interest rates to their lower bound. The main refinancing rate now stands at 0.05%, and the deposit facility rate at -0.20%. We also announced further measures to support lending and materially ease credit conditions for households and non-financial businesses. These measures include the targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs), which we started to implement in September. These operations allow banks to borrow from the Eurosystem at very attractive conditions over a period of up to four years, provided that they meet certain conditions regarding their lending to the private non-financial sector (excluding loans to households for house purchases). Moreover, last week we started to purchase simple and transparent asset-backed securities under our ABS purchase programme (ABSPP). Purchases will be restricted to senior and – down the line – guaranteed mezzanine tranches. Due to the stringent quality criteria for eligibility demanded of the underlying loans, and the considerable amount of credit enhancement which is built into the securitisations qualifying for the programme, the additional risk exposure which the Eurosystem will acquire under the ABSPP will remain limited.We have also already started purchasing covered bonds issued by euro area banks under our new covered bond purchase programme (CBPP3). These measures will enhance the transmission of monetary policy, support the provision of credit to the euro area economy and, as a result, ease our monetary policy stance more broadly. They will also have a sizeable impact on our balance sheet, which we expect to move towards its early 2012 dimension. This will ensure the necessary degree of monetary accommodation which will effectively contribute to a gradual recovery and a return of inflation to levels closer to our aim of below, but close to, 2%. We already have indications that this credit easing package is delivering tangible benefits, but time is needed for the positive effects to fully materialise. However, should it become necessary to further address risks of too prolonged a period of low inflation, the Governing Council is unanimous in its commitment to using additional unconventional instruments within its mandate. In this context, we have also tasked relevant ECB staff and Eurosystem committees with the timely preparation of further measures to be implemented, if needed.Throughout the crisis, the ECB has undertaken a series of measures to pursue its mandate of price stability, including unconventional measures such as the ones just described. To carry out its tasks, the ECB enjoys a high degree of independence under the EU treaties. This independence manifests itself in a number of institutional features of the Eurosystem. Let’s take collegiality: the Eurosystem’s main decision-making bodies (the Executive Board and the Governing Council) both work in a collegiate way, as it is absolutely essential to take decisions which reflect the wisdom and expertise of all members. For example, I have now worked for many years with Governor Liikanen in the Governing Council and really treasure his input into the discussions. Like the other governors, he is not there as a delegate of his country but contributes with his expertise, knowledge and the work of Suomen Pankki - Finlands Bank so that the best decision is taken for the euro area as a whole. National central banks (NCBs) play a crucial role in the functioning of the Eurosystem. NCBs’ tasks range from the research and analysis which feed into the decision-making process to implementing monetary policy decisions, the collection and production of statistics, and the operational aspects of payment systems and banknotes. Their role cannot be overplayed.As an independent central bank, the ECB is committed to being fully accountable to citizens and their elected representatives and has an established framework to discharge accountability to the European Parliament. This includes, most importantly, the hearings of its Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs (ECON), as well as an array of further channels for interacting with the European Parliament. As regards national parliaments, Finlands Bank is accountable to your parliament, and I understand that the Parliamentary Supervisory Council is provided with information on monetary policy regularly to exercise its prerogatives. In addition, our accountability towards the European Parliament does not exclude that there are also a number ad hoc interactions with national parliaments, such as today’s meeting. But accountability would not be meaningful without an appropriate degree of transparency, to which the ECB is also strongly committed. In general, the ECB’s commitment to transparency has increased over the years. The ECB regularly publishes a variety of data on the execution of monetary policy operations and the liquidity conditions of the Eurosystem. The most recent examples include the weekly publication of the value of all monetary policy portfolios, i.e. the Securities Markets Programme (SMP), the covered bond purchase programmes and the ABS purchase programme.Transparency is key, especially in times where unconventional measures are being taken. This is why the Governing Council committed to the publication of an account of its monetary policy discussions. Finally, let me turn to the governance of Economic and Monetary Union. In the short run, our overarching focus should be on the full and consistent implementation of the existing fiscal and macroeconomic surveillance framework. This is key to bringing down high public debt ratios, to raising potential growth and to increasing the resilience of the euro area economy to shocks. Now is certainly not the right moment for complacency, neither in the area of fiscal policies nor with regard to structural reforms. It should be clear that monetary policy alone cannot do all the “heavy lifting”. All policy actors – both at the national and the European level – need to do their part. This should be embedded in a comprehensive strategy that puts the euro area economy back on track.The Stability and Growth Pact should remain the anchor for confidence in sustainable public finances – throughout the procedural steps under the agreed framework. With regard to macroeconomic surveillance, the implementation of structural reforms is imperative and should be a matter of priority for the euro area governments. In the medium to long term, we need to explore various options to further ensure a smooth functioning of EMU. During the crisis, euro area Member States – including Finland – have made a significant effort in terms of strengthening both discipline and solidarity within EMU. While this has contributed decisively to overcoming the crisis, I believe that this is not yet fully commensurate with the long-term necessities of being part of a monetary union. In the euro area, economic policy choices are so interdependent that, ultimately, sovereignty over economic policy-making should be exercised jointly. Therefore, we need, in my view, to further share sovereignty in this realm. This could translate into a leap forward from common rules to common institutions. The forthcoming report that the Euro Summit has commissioned on the future of economic governance will present a good starting point for further reflection on these matters.I am here today to represent the ECB and am looking forward to a constructive exchange of views. Therefore, I very much welcome your questions. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",summaryin speech finnish parliament presid highlight past crisi year ecb act forc safeguard price stabil contribut financi stabil euro area whole particular ecb taken sever nonstandard measur ensur transmiss monetari polici economi latest unconvent measur announc ecb target long term refinanc oper tltros cover bond ab purchas programm sizeabl impact balanc sheet expect move toward earli dimens ensur necessari degre monetari accommod contribut gradual recoveri return inflat level closer close howev becom necessari address risk prolong period low inflat govern council unanim commit use addit unconvent instrument within mandat account transpar essenti element balanc independ central bank especi time unconvent measur taken ecb regular publish varieti data execut monetari polici oper liquid condit eurosystem e smp cover bond programm ab purchas programm portfolio addit govern council commit public account monetari polici discuss regard fiscal polici structur reform stabil growth pact remain anchor confid sustain public financ comprehens strategi need put euro area economi back track involv share sovereignti e leap forward common rule common institut upcom report commiss euro summit futur econom govern present good start point reflect honour member parliament ladi gentlemen would like thank warm invit address today good opportun explain polici european central bank ecb listen concern question look forward fruit exchang view today lay ground discuss focus three topic ecb monetari polici even though elabor possibl upcom measur socal quiet period member govern council expect remain silent issu ecb account framework transpar progress toward build deeper econom monetari union emu let first turn econom develop euro area seen weaken euro area growth momentum summer euro area econom outlook surround number downsid risk also recent forecast privat public sector institut revis downward expect moder recoveri next year still remain place reflect monetari polici measur ongo improv financi condit progress made visàvi structur reform fiscal consolid recoveri like dampen high unemploy sizeabl unutilis capac necessari balanc sheet adjust inflat euro area remain low stand octob light recent sharp fall oil price take account prevail futur price energi inflat expect remain around current low level come month increas gradual meanwhil face continu sluggish money credit dynam even growth rate key aggreg edg recent month past crisi year ecb act forc safeguard price stabil contribut financi stabil euro area whole particular taken sever nonstandard measur ensur transmiss monetari polici economi provid euro area bank system unpreced fund includ full allot fix rate bank demand liquid also communic readi undertak outright monetari transact view toward restor monetari transmiss mechan impair distress sovereign bond market measur success improv bank access privat credit counter financi fragment broader financ condit foremost cost borrow bank except sluggish respond monetari polici accommod introduc consequ monetari credit dynam follow protract negat trend recent backdrop view persist weak inflat outlook decid june septemb adopt number monetari polici measur monetari polici decis move monetari polici framework base predomin passiv provis liquid activ control manag balanc sheet septemb cut key ecb interest rate lower bound main refinanc rate stand deposit facil rate also announc measur support lend materi eas credit condit household nonfinanci busi measur includ target longerterm refinanc oper tltros start implement septemb oper allow bank borrow eurosystem attract condit period four year provid meet certain condit regard lend privat nonfinanci sector exclud loan household hous purchas moreov last week start purchas simpl transpar assetback secur ab purchas programm abspp purchas restrict senior line guarante mezzanin tranch due stringent qualiti criteria elig demand under loan consider amount credit enhanc built securitis qualifi programm addit risk exposur eurosystem acquir abspp remain limit also alreadi start purchas cover bond issu euro area bank new cover bond purchas programm cbpp measur enhanc transmiss monetari polici support provis credit euro area economi result eas monetari polici stanc broad also sizeabl impact balanc sheet expect move toward earli dimens ensur necessari degre monetari accommod effect contribut gradual recoveri return inflat level closer aim close alreadi indic credit eas packag deliv tangibl benefit time need posit effect fulli materialis howev becom necessari address risk prolong period low inflat govern council unanim commit use addit unconvent instrument within mandat context also task relev ecb staff eurosystem committe time prepar measur implement need throughout crisi ecb undertaken seri measur pursu mandat price stabil includ unconvent measur one describ carri task ecb enjoy high degre independ eu treati independ manifest number institut featur eurosystem let take collegi eurosystem main decisionmak bodi execut board govern council work collegi way absolut essenti take decis reflect wisdom expertis member exampl work mani year governor liikanen govern council realli treasur input discuss like governor deleg countri contribut expertis knowledg work suomen pankki finland bank best decis taken euro area whole nation central bank ncbs play crucial role function eurosystem ncbs task rang research analysi feed decisionmak process implement monetari polici decis collect product statist oper aspect payment system banknot role cannot overplay independ central bank ecb commit fulli account citizen elect repres establish framework discharg account european parliament includ import hear committe econom monetari affair econ well array channel interact european parliament regard nation parliament finland bank account parliament understand parliamentari supervisori council provid inform monetari polici regular exercis prerog addit account toward european parliament exclud also number ad hoc interact nation parliament today meet account would meaning without appropri degre transpar ecb also strong commit general ecb commit transpar increas year ecb regular publish varieti data execut monetari polici oper liquid condit eurosystem recent exampl includ week public valu monetari polici portfolio e secur market programm smp cover bond purchas programm ab purchas programm transpar key especi time unconvent measur taken govern council commit public account monetari polici discuss final let turn govern econom monetari union short run overarch focus full consist implement exist fiscal macroeconom surveil framework key bring high public debt ratio rais potenti growth increas resili euro area economi shock certain right moment complac neither area fiscal polici regard structur reform clear monetari polici alon cannot heavi lift polici actor nation european level need part embed comprehens strategi put euro area economi back track stabil growth pact remain anchor confid sustain public financ throughout procedur step agre framework regard macroeconom surveil implement structur reform imper matter prioriti euro area govern medium long term need explor various option ensur smooth function emu crisi euro area member state includ finland made signific effort term strengthen disciplin solidar within emu contribut decis overcom crisi believ yet fulli commensur longterm necess part monetari union euro area econom polici choic interdepend ultim sovereignti econom policymak exercis joint therefor need view share sovereignti realm could translat leap forward common rule common institut forthcom report euro summit commiss futur econom govern present good start point reflect matter today repres ecb look forward construct exchang view therefor much welcom question reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en