Benoît Cœuré: Monetary Policy and Banking Supervision,07-02-2013,European Central Bank,ECB,3763,"<p>When we look at the history of central banks, contributing to financial stability was one of their roles in most countries, although to varying degrees. [2] Even when central banks were assigned a relatively narrow mandate, such as that of inflation targeting in recent years, they often played a decisive part as soon as financial instability struck. In particular, their ability to act as lender of last resort in the financial system and to manage liquidity in the interbank market typically made them a key player in crisis management. Even in normal times, the central role of bank deposits in the stock of money makes monetary stability dependent on the soundness of the banking sector. In sum, in the late Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa’s words, financial stability has been part of the “genetic code” of central banks. [3]There have been many cases of lender-of-last-resort interventions by central banks during the present crisis. For example, when we compare the total emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) that euro area national central banks granted to individual credit institutions last summer with the overall amount of liquidity provided at the same time by the Eurosystem, we can see that the total ELA amounts to almost one-seventh. Just to quote an example from here in Germany: the Bundesbank granted €35 billion of emergency liquidity assistance to the ailing bank Hypo Real Estate. [4]More generally, the experience of the last five years has underlined the importance of central banks in financial stability, a task which they have historically performed. But central banks were not always and everywhere tasked with financial supervision, which aims to prevent crises from happening in the first place. For example, before the present crisis the institutions responsible for banking supervision differed from country to country. [5] In fact, in the late 1990s there was a trend for financial supervision to be placed outside central banks and entrusted to cross-sectoral authorities in charge of banks, insurance and securities markets. The crisis seems to have reversed this trend, as recent reforms in the US and Europe show. Today, most Eurosystem governors are banking supervisors.In December 2012 euro area finance ministers reached an agreement to create a Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). This is currently under discussion with the European Parliament and it will give the ECB a bank supervisory role. [6] As a result of the crisis, there is a consensus that a European banking union involving the ECB is an important component to complete the Single Market for financial services and for a genuine Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). Together with the other banking union components – common resolution and harmonised deposit insurance arrangements – this should help to overcome the fragmentation of money markets and break the vicious circle between financial and sovereign instability in Europe. Since the ECB has not been a bank supervisor and since its primary mandate is and will remain to conduct monetary policy and maintain price stability, it is time to consider how monetary policy and banking supervision are related. I will do so in this speech, by first discussing the benefits a bank supervisory role could offer monetary policy – particularly in terms of informational advantages – and then by considering some design features, which are important when tackling the challenges of putting monetary policy and banking supervision under one roof.The banking union will strengthen the governance framework supporting the Single Market and EMU. Obviously, its primary purpose is not to support monetary policy. In fact, as the short history of EMU suggests, price stability can be maintained without the ECB being responsible for banking supervision. But integrating the SSM in the ECB also creates some new opportunities for the conduct of monetary policy and other functions closely related to it. I particularly see four areas in this respect: the state of the macroeconomy; monetary policy options; interactions with supervisory policies; and the management of the central bank balance sheet. I will argue that these opportunities are greater in turbulent times than in quiet times.Data collected and analyses conducted as part of banking supervision provide valuable additional information about the banking sector and may feed into the assessment of the macroeconomic situation. According to the proposed SSM regulation [7] it has been estimated that the SSM would directly supervise approximately 130 to 140 banks in the euro area countries, constituting more than 80% of total euro area bank assets, and well cover the banking sector in all these countries.This information could complement the data collected for the ECB’s monetary analysis. The ECB’s monetary policy strategy is based on two pillars, an economic one and a monetary one, and thereby assigns an important role to money and credit. The broad range of tools regularly used in our monetary analysis already provides valuable information about the build-up and unravelling of widespread financial imbalances. Additional supervisory data and analyses, be they micro-prudential or macro-prudential, would further enhance the breadth, depth and granularity of information about the functioning of the banking sector.The value added of this information will become even more critical in a crisis, given the important role of banks in severe financial crises and the nature of the data concerned. Moreover, analytical supervisory assessment indicators and early-warning tools can put the new data to work in assessing credit developments. [8] Additional information on the banking sector is likely to be more important in the euro area than in the US, because in the euro area bank lending accounts for almost two-thirds of the total financing of non-financial corporations, whereas in the US bank lending is only just above one-quarter of total firm financing.Given Europe’s bank-based financial structure, monetary transmission channels through the banking sector are particularly important in understanding the effects of monetary policy actions, standard and non-standard. For example, a key feature of the present crisis is the impairment of the monetary transmission mechanism in which fragilities in banks’ funding models and their exposure to government debt have played a significant role. A thorough understanding of banks’ behaviour and health across jurisdictions facilitates the design and implementation of non-standard monetary policy measures and will also facilitate the exit from these measures when the time is right.Monetary policy interacts with supervisory and regulatory policies, be they micro-prudential or macro-prudential in nature. If the monetary policy objective and the supervisory objective are distinctly defined and separate instruments are assigned to each of them, then a single institution could take the interdependencies better into account than separate authorities. Interactions can be expected to occur in particular with macro-prudential policies, which increase in importance due to the lessons from the crisis, and operate through channels closely related to monetary policy transmission. The allocation of macro-prudential regulatory instruments under the SSM is therefore an important design feature of the draft legislation.Research confirms that it is advisable for monetary policy to focus on price stability and prudential policy on financial stability. [9] Against this background, as an institution with a clear price stability mandate, compliance with which can be easily verified, the ECB will have incentives to intensify the prudential policies seeking to counteract emerging financial imbalances and risks. In turn, and importantly, this would reduce pressures on monetary policy to do so. It will also have incentives to conduct supervisory policies in a way that would reduce the likelihood of crises and therefore of lender-of-last-resort interventions. This would also diminish the possibility of generating adverse incentives for banks, i.e. moral hazard involved with emergency assistance.A single institution could also avoid conflicts and coordination problems between separate policy authorities, which might be particularly pronounced in a crisis and in a multi-country setting.Monetary policy operations expose the central bank to credit (and other) risks, which are controlled through adequate collateral and other risk management techniques. Good banking supervision and prompt corrective action ensure the soundness of counterparties in these transactions and a central bank therefore has particular incentives to make sure its supervision is rigorous. Rigorous supervision, in turn, protects the central bank’s balance sheet and gives it greater control over it, also safeguarding the central bank’s independence and credibility.This is an important point. As the central bank has a direct interest in strong supervision, the risk of financial dominance over monetary policy becomes less likely, i.e. the risk that monetary policy operations could be increasingly dominated by the state of the banking sector. This, in turn, reduces also the risk of fiscal dominance over monetary policy, which means the risk that fiscal behaviour forces monetary policy to react in ways that it otherwise would not do. As governments are always reluctant to fund unpopular bailouts or incur the social costs of bank insolvencies, they may prefer to rely on prolonged central bank liquidity provision to keep banks alive. What is crucial for adequate supervisory rigour is of course the independence of the supervisory function in the central bank, a point I will come back to later in this speech. In order to protect a central bank from regulatory forbearance, supervisory rigour is necessary on an ongoing basis, as is the determination to wind up failed banks. [10] In turn, this requires the existence of orderly resolution mechanisms with an adequate financial backstop. I will also come back to that point.Moreover, a central bank has an incentive to establish rigorous supervision since it would diminish the trade-offs between the need for tightening collateral requirements in downturns to protect its balance sheet and the need for relaxing these collateral requirements to stabilise banks. The tightening of collateral requirements in downturns amplifies the pro-cyclicality of financial systems, while relaxing those requirements increases balance-sheet risks and distorts financial sector behaviour. When implementing the SSM in the ECB, we will make every effort to use these opportunities to the full. However, we will seize these opportunities only to the extent that they do not create conflicts of interest, reputational risks or risks to the independence of the monetary policy authority, a point I’ll consider next. [11]At least three types of challenges and risks need to be managed when integrating supervision in a central bank alongside monetary policy. They relate to potential conflicts of interest, reputational risks and central bank independence. The literature on whether adding banking supervision to monetary policy creates conflicts of interest is not well developed. [12] The concern is that a central bank which is also in charge of supervision would turn into a supervisor with access to central bank liquidity. As recently pointed out by Stefan Gerlach, [13] it could then occasionally relax its monetary policy, potentially generating an inflationary bias impairing its credibility, and also contribute to more risk-taking by banks (moral hazard), and in turn breed future financial instability. The central bank could in particular be inclined to continue lending to weak banks for fear that winding them up would trigger losses. [14] Although this literature is not conclusive, we take such concerns extremely seriously.To protect against such effects both the regulation proposed by the European Commission and the ECB’s Opinion on this regulation call for a governance structure that strictly separates the monetary functions from the supervisory functions. [15] This should entail a separation of the decision-making bodies, including procedures to strictly limit the ECB Governing Council’s involvement in supervisory decisions. It should also include distinct objectives for the decision-making bodies and different policy instruments. Eijffinger and Nijskens, for example, recently pointed out that the assignment of separate instruments to the two policy branches would solve potential conflicts. [16] There is one situation in which the distinction between supervisory and some monetary policy instruments is less clear cut, namely, in the case of certain non-standard monetary policy actions in the midst of a financial crisis. However, in such a situation, the outlook for the economy and prices has considerable downside risks, so the direction of financial stability and price stability actions (e.g. to repair a broken monetary transmission mechanism) typically go in the same direction and a conflict between both policy branches is rather unlikely. The draft legislation also confirms that the other statutory tasks and objectives of the ECB remain unaffected by the SSM, implying that monetary policy will continue to be conducted by the Governing Council in full independence, with the primary objective of maintaining price stability over the medium term. With our quantitative definition of price stability, it will be easy to verify every month that inflation expectations remain well anchored, as they are today. It is hard to see how financial stability dominance over monetary policy could occur if such precautions are taken. At the same time, in order to exploit the advantages that I was discussing before, it is necessary to put in place mechanisms that allow an adequate flow of data and (independently executed) analyses between the two functions. Of course, this flow of information should not weaken in any form the necessary separation in decision-making, objectives and instruments. In short, separation does not mean isolation.In order to ensure the success of banking supervision, competencies and policy instruments need to be assigned to the new SSM which would allow it to perform its tasks effectively. Otherwise, reputational risks could arise that might negatively affect the institution as a whole. The current draft legislation would grant the SSM an appropriate mixture of micro- and macro-prudential instruments for it to conduct supervision effectively. For example, on the micro-prudential side it would have all the relevant powers, ranging from bank authorisation to administrative sanctions, from the control of capital levels to compensation issues, through to structural issues such as business models and mergers. But even if bank supervisors use their powers effectively, this does not imply that there will never be any bank failures, fraud or other highly visible negative events, which could affect the decision-makers’ reputation. This is another challenge in the business of banking supervision. This residual reputational risk should also be managed through an appropriate separation of responsibilities. Beyond the internal functional separation this should be fostered through a corresponding separation in external communication. The Chair and Vice-Chair of the envisaged ECB Supervisory Board will play an important role in communicating publicly and reporting to the European Parliament, as will the heads of the national supervisory agencies belonging to the SSM in their respective jurisdictions.Bank failures and financial fraud often affect small savers or have an impact on public budgets, and lead to the involvement of democratically elected governments and Parliaments. While indeed, the highest standard of democratic accountability needs to be ensured, history shows that political interference can also constrain the effectiveness of banking supervision. In particular, if there is political interference to avoid costly bank restructurings or closures and it undermines supervisory rigour, then the beneficial effects in terms of control over the central bank’s balance sheet and the avoidance of financial or fiscal dominance risks might not accrue. There should therefore be a strict separation between the supervisor and a resolution authority.Against this background it is reassuring that the transfer of supervisory responsibilities to the SSM will not have any implications for the independence of the ECB in performing all its tasks. By implication, the necessary internal precautions against political interference in supervisory matters adversely affecting the ECB’s independence in conducting monetary policy have been taken. But further external precautions need to be taken to ensure that financial and fiscal dominance risks do not threaten the independence of the ECB. A crucial point in this context is the existence of a well-functioning European bank resolution mechanism. Such an outside mechanism provides further protection for the central bank’s balance sheet and its monetary policy independence, and has a twofold objective: first, it aims to limit the residual risk to governments’ balance sheets, in particular through the timely implementation of bail-in instruments, so that the risk of financial dominance is not compounded by a risk of fiscal dominance. Second, it aims to ensure a strict separation between supervision and resolution. 2013 will be a key year for Europe to make progress with this second leg of the banking union. Let me now conclude. It is essential for Europe to introduce the different elements of the banking union as soon as possible, starting with the SSM involving the ECB, and promptly continuing with a separate bank resolution mechanism. This will not only contribute to the integrity of the euro area and the completion of EMU, but also has some benefits for the conduct of monetary policy.The current draft legislative framework proposed by the European Commission and the preparatory work done by the ECB, the national central banks and competent supervisory authorities on implementing the SSM also takes a forward-looking approach to handling the challenges of integrating banking supervision in a central bank. This will make sure that the SSM achieves its objectives; that the desirable synergies between banking supervision and monetary policy (and other central bank functions) are realised; and that the primary objective of monetary policy to maintain price stability is fully respected. To achieve this objective, three conditions should be met: the internal governance of the ECB should strictly separate the two functions; the architecture of the banking union should provide for a separate, common resolution mechanism as soon as possible; and the ECB as a supervisor should not hesitate to enforce capital and liquidity regulations, recognise losses in the banking system and identify failed banks.Price stability will remain the only needle of our compass for conducting monetary policy in the Governing Council. If we implement the SSM well, taking advantage of the opportunities and carefully addressing the challenges, we have a good chance of further improving our ability to conduct a stability-oriented monetary policy.[1]I wish to thank Philipp Hartmann for his key contribution to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.[2]See, for example, M. Bordo (2007), A Brief History of Central Banks, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Commentary, December; C. Goodhart (2011), The changing role of central banks, Financial History Review, 18(2), 135-154; and C. Reinhart and K. Rogoff (2012), Shifting Mandates: The Federal Reserve’s First Centennial, paper presented at the 2013 American Economic Association Meetings, San Diego, 5 January 2013.[3]T. Padoa-Schioppa, T. (2003), Central Banks and Financial Stability: Exploring a Land in Between, in V. Gaspar, P. Hartmann and O. Sleijpen (eds.), The Transformation of the European Financial System, Proceedings of the Second ECB Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt, May, 269-310.[4]Hypo Real Estate (2008), Press release: Hypo Real Estate Group publishing interim financial statements as of 30 September 2008, Munich, 17 November.[5]See, for example, C. Goodhart and D. Schoenmaker (1995), Should the functions of monetary policy and banking supervision be separated?, Oxford Economic Papers 47(4), 539-560; G. Di Giorgio and C. Di Noia (1999), Should Banking Supervision and Monetary Policy Tasks Be Given to Different Agencies?, International Finance 2(3), 361-378; and M. Horáková (ed., 2012), How Countries Supervise their Banks, Insurers and Securities Markets 2012, Risk Books, May.[6]Interestingly, Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa (1999), in a lecture entitled “EMU and banking supervision” at the London School of Economics, Financial Markets Group, 24 February, regarded it as “absolutely necessary” even at the start of EMU that cooperation among bank supervisors would over time lead to a type of “collective supervisor” that would act as effectively as if there were a single supervisor. This would also desirable, he added, because it would “assist the Eurosystem in the performance of its basic tasks”.[7]Document number 17812/12, as published on the Council of the European Union’s website, http://register.consilium.europa.eu. [8]J. Peek, E. Rosengren and G. Tootell (1999), Is Bank Supervision Central To Central Banking?, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2), 629-653, argued, using US data from the 1990s, that the incorporation of supervisory CAMEL ratings may improve macroeconomic forecasts. CAMEL is an abbreviation for a system of supervisory indicators used in the US describing the conditions of banks aggregating information about capital, asset quality, management, earnings and asset-liability management. [9]See, for example, I. Angeloni and E. Faia (2009), A Tale of Two Policies: Prudential Regulation and Monetary Policy with Fragile Banks, Kiel Working Papers, No 1569, Kiel Institute for the World Economy, forthcoming Journal of Monetary Economics, or D. Beau, L. Clerc and B. Mojon (2011), Macro-Prudential Policy and the Conduct of Monetary Policy, Banque de France Occasional Paper, No 8. A summary of the literature is provided in European Central Bank (2012a), Report on the First Two Years of the Macro-prudential Research Network, Frankfurt, October.[10]In the US, 469 banks were closed by the FDIC between September 2007 and December 2012. [11]There are also advantages for banking supervision if it is combined with monetary policy within one institution. For example, because of its role in monetary policy a central bank needs to assess the macroeconomy and its linkages to the financial sector, which implies a natural systemic/macro-prudential orientation. Such an orientation has been largely absent from traditional supervisory practices. Central banks also have a culture of using economic analysis and research, which typically does not exist or barely exists in supervisory authorities (see e.g. P. Dasgupta, C. Goodhart and D. Schoenmaker (2002), The Skill Profile of Central Bankers and Supervisors, European Finance Review 6, 397-427). Moreover, the role of central banks in payment and settlement systems and their frequent contacts with banks through their market operations provides them with additional sources of information relevant to financial stability. [12]Examples from this literature are Heller (1991), Prudential supervision and monetary policy, in Frenkel, J., and M. Goldstein (eds.), Essays in honor of Jacques J. Polak, International Monetary Fund; C. Goodhart and D. Schoenmaker (1992), Institutional Separation Between Supervisory and Monetary Agencies, Giorn. Econ. 9; C. Goodhart and D. Schoenmaker (1995), Should the Functions of Monetary Policy and Banking Supervision Be Separated?, Oxford Economic Papers 47(4), 539-560; and Di Giorgio and Di Noia (1999), Should Banking Supervision and Monetary Policy Tasks Be Given to Different Agencies?, International Finance 2(3), 361-378. [13]S. Gerlach (2013), Banking and Fiscal Union, Introductory remarks at a panel session at the EUI conference on “The State of Play in the Euro Area – Fixing the EMU for the Long Term”, Florence, 21 January.[14]This argument is put forward by M. Brunnermeier and H. Gersbach (2012), True independence for the ECB: Triggering power – no more, no less, VoxEU, 20 December.[15]European Central Bank (2012b), Opinion of the European Central Bank of 27 November 2012 on a proposal for a Council regulation conferring specific tasks on the European Central Bank concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions and a proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 establishing a European Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority), CON/2012/96, and European Central Bank (2012c), Towards a banking union, Financial Stability Review, December.[16]S. Eijffinger and R. Nijskens (2012), Monetary policy and banking supervision, VoxEU, 19 December.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",look histori central bank contribut financi stabil one role countri although vari degre even central bank assign relat narrow mandat inflat target recent year often play decis part soon financi instabl struck particular abil act lender last resort financi system manag liquid interbank market typic made key player crisi manag even normal time central role bank deposit stock money make monetari stabil depend sound bank sector sum late tommaso padoaschioppa word financi stabil part genet code central bank mani case lenderoflastresort intervent central bank present crisi exampl compar total emerg liquid assist ela euro area nation central bank grant individu credit institut last summer overal amount liquid provid time eurosystem see total ela amount almost oneseventh quot exampl germani bundesbank grant billion emerg liquid assist ail bank hypo real estat general experi last five year underlin import central bank financi stabil task histor perform central bank alway everywher task financi supervis aim prevent crise happen first place exampl present crisi institut respons bank supervis differ countri countri fact late trend financi supervis place outsid central bank entrust crosssector author charg bank insur secur market crisi seem revers trend recent reform us europ show today eurosystem governor bank supervisor decemb euro area financ minist reach agreement creat singl supervisori mechan ssm current discuss european parliament give ecb bank supervisori role result crisi consensus european bank union involv ecb import compon complet singl market financi servic genuin econom monetari union emu togeth bank union compon common resolut harmonis deposit insur arrang help overcom fragment money market break vicious circl financi sovereign instabl europ sinc ecb bank supervisor sinc primari mandat remain conduct monetari polici maintain price stabil time consid monetari polici bank supervis relat speech first discuss benefit bank supervisori role could offer monetari polici particular term inform advantag consid design featur import tackl challeng put monetari polici bank supervis one roof bank union strengthen govern framework support singl market emu obvious primari purpos support monetari polici fact short histori emu suggest price stabil maintain without ecb respons bank supervis integr ssm ecb also creat new opportun conduct monetari polici function close relat particular see four area respect state macroeconomi monetari polici option interact supervisori polici manag central bank balanc sheet argu opportun greater turbul time quiet time data collect analys conduct part bank supervis provid valuabl addit inform bank sector may feed assess macroeconom situat accord propos ssm regul estim ssm would direct supervis approxim bank euro area countri constitut total euro area bank asset well cover bank sector countri inform could complement data collect ecb monetari analysi ecb monetari polici strategi base two pillar econom one monetari one therebi assign import role money credit broad rang tool regular use monetari analysi alreadi provid valuabl inform buildup unravel widespread financi imbal addit supervisori data analys microprudenti macroprudenti would enhanc breadth depth granular inform function bank sector valu ad inform becom even critic crisi given import role bank sever financi crise natur data concern moreov analyt supervisori assess indic earlywarn tool put new data work assess credit develop addit inform bank sector like import euro area us euro area bank lend account almost twothird total financ nonfinanci corpor wherea us bank lend onequart total firm financ given europ bankbas financi structur monetari transmiss channel bank sector particular import understand effect monetari polici action standard nonstandard exampl key featur present crisi impair monetari transmiss mechan fragil bank fund model exposur govern debt play signific role thorough understand bank behaviour health across jurisdict facilit design implement nonstandard monetari polici measur also facilit exit measur time right monetari polici interact supervisori regulatori polici microprudenti macroprudenti natur monetari polici object supervisori object distinct defin separ instrument assign singl institut could take interdepend better account separ author interact expect occur particular macroprudenti polici increas import due lesson crisi oper channel close relat monetari polici transmiss alloc macroprudenti regulatori instrument ssm therefor import design featur draft legisl research confirm advis monetari polici focus price stabil prudenti polici financi stabil background institut clear price stabil mandat complianc easili verifi ecb incent intensifi prudenti polici seek counteract emerg financi imbal risk turn import would reduc pressur monetari polici also incent conduct supervisori polici way would reduc likelihood crise therefor lenderoflastresort intervent would also diminish possibl generat advers incent bank e moral hazard involv emerg assist singl institut could also avoid conflict coordin problem separ polici author might particular pronounc crisi multicountri set monetari polici oper expos central bank credit risk control adequ collater risk manag techniqu good bank supervis prompt correct action ensur sound counterparti transact central bank therefor particular incent make sure supervis rigor rigor supervis turn protect central bank balanc sheet give greater control also safeguard central bank independ credibl import point central bank direct interest strong supervis risk financi domin monetari polici becom less like e risk monetari polici oper could increas domin state bank sector turn reduc also risk fiscal domin monetari polici mean risk fiscal behaviour forc monetari polici react way otherwis would govern alway reluct fund unpopular bailout incur social cost bank insolv may prefer reli prolong central bank liquid provis keep bank aliv crucial adequ supervisori rigour cours independ supervisori function central bank point come back later speech order protect central bank regulatori forbear supervisori rigour necessari ongo basi determin wind fail bank turn requir exist order resolut mechan adequ financi backstop also come back point moreov central bank incent establish rigor supervis sinc would diminish tradeoff need tighten collater requir downturn protect balanc sheet need relax collater requir stabilis bank tighten collater requir downturn amplifi procycl financi system relax requir increas balancesheet risk distort financi sector behaviour implement ssm ecb make everi effort use opportun full howev seiz opportun extent creat conflict interest reput risk risk independ monetari polici author point ll consid next least three type challeng risk need manag integr supervis central bank alongsid monetari polici relat potenti conflict interest reput risk central bank independ literatur whether ad bank supervis monetari polici creat conflict interest well develop concern central bank also charg supervis would turn supervisor access central bank liquid recent point stefan gerlach could occasion relax monetari polici potenti generat inflationari bias impair credibl also contribut risktak bank moral hazard turn breed futur financi instabl central bank could particular inclin continu lend weak bank fear wind would trigger loss although literatur conclus take concern extrem serious protect effect regul propos european commiss ecb opinion regul call govern structur strict separ monetari function supervisori function entail separ decisionmak bodi includ procedur strict limit ecb govern council involv supervisori decis also includ distinct object decisionmak bodi differ polici instrument eijffing nijsken exampl recent point assign separ instrument two polici branch would solv potenti conflict one situat distinct supervisori monetari polici instrument less clear cut name case certain nonstandard monetari polici action midst financi crisi howev situat outlook economi price consider downsid risk direct financi stabil price stabil action e g repair broken monetari transmiss mechan typic go direct conflict polici branch rather unlik draft legisl also confirm statutori task object ecb remain unaffect ssm impli monetari polici continu conduct govern council full independ primari object maintain price stabil medium term quantit definit price stabil easi verifi everi month inflat expect remain well anchor today hard see financi stabil domin monetari polici could occur precaut taken time order exploit advantag discuss necessari put place mechan allow adequ flow data independ execut analys two function cours flow inform weaken form necessari separ decisionmak object instrument short separ mean isol order ensur success bank supervis compet polici instrument need assign new ssm would allow perform task effect otherwis reput risk could aris might negat affect institut whole current draft legisl would grant ssm appropri mixtur micro macroprudenti instrument conduct supervis effect exampl microprudenti side would relev power rang bank authoris administr sanction control capit level compens issu structur issu busi model merger even bank supervisor use power effect impli never bank failur fraud high visibl negat event could affect decisionmak reput anoth challeng busi bank supervis residu reput risk also manag appropri separ respons beyond intern function separ foster correspond separ extern communic chair vicechair envisag ecb supervisori board play import role communic public report european parliament head nation supervisori agenc belong ssm respect jurisdict bank failur financi fraud often affect small saver impact public budget lead involv democrat elect govern parliament inde highest standard democrat account need ensur histori show polit interfer also constrain effect bank supervis particular polit interfer avoid cost bank restructur closur undermin supervisori rigour benefici effect term control central bank balanc sheet avoid financi fiscal domin risk might accru therefor strict separ supervisor resolut author background reassur transfer supervisori respons ssm implic independ ecb perform task implic necessari intern precaut polit interfer supervisori matter advers affect ecb independ conduct monetari polici taken extern precaut need taken ensur financi fiscal domin risk threaten independ ecb crucial point context exist wellfunct european bank resolut mechan outsid mechan provid protect central bank balanc sheet monetari polici independ twofold object first aim limit residu risk govern balanc sheet particular time implement bailin instrument risk financi domin compound risk fiscal domin second aim ensur strict separ supervis resolut key year europ make progress second leg bank union let conclud essenti europ introduc differ element bank union soon possibl start ssm involv ecb prompt continu separ bank resolut mechan contribut integr euro area complet emu also benefit conduct monetari polici current draft legisl framework propos european commiss preparatori work done ecb nation central bank compet supervisori author implement ssm also take forwardlook approach handl challeng integr bank supervis central bank make sure ssm achiev object desir synergi bank supervis monetari polici central bank function realis primari object monetari polici maintain price stabil fulli respect achiev object three condit met intern govern ecb strict separ two function architectur bank union provid separ common resolut mechan soon possibl ecb supervisor hesit enforc capit liquid regul recognis loss bank system identifi fail bank price stabil remain needl compass conduct monetari polici govern council implement ssm well take advantag opportun care address challeng good chanc improv abil conduct stabilityori monetari polici wish thank hartmann key contribut speech remain sole respons opinion contain herein see exampl m bordo brief histori central bank feder reserv bank cleveland econom commentari decemb c goodhart chang role central bank financi histori review c reinhart k rogoff shift mandat feder reserv first centenni paper present american econom associ meet san diego januari padoaschioppa central bank financi stabil explor land v gaspar p hartmann o sleijpen ed transform european financi system proceed second ecb central bank confer frankfurt may hypo real estat press releas hypo real estat group publish interim financi statement septemb munich novemb see exampl c goodhart d schoenmak function monetari polici bank supervis separ oxford econom paper g di giorgio c di noia bank supervis monetari polici task given differ agenc intern financ m horáková ed countri supervis bank insur secur market risk book may interest tommaso padoaschioppa lectur entitl emu bank supervis london school econom financi market group februari regard absolut necessari even start emu cooper among bank supervisor would time lead type collect supervisor would act effect singl supervisor would also desir ad would assist eurosystem perform basic task document number publish council european union websit http regist consilium europa eu j peek e rosengren g tootel bank supervis central central bank quarter journal econom argu use us data incorpor supervisori camel rate may improv macroeconom forecast camel abbrevi system supervisori indic use us describ condit bank aggreg inform capit asset qualiti manag earn assetli manag see exampl angeloni e faia tale two polici prudenti regul monetari polici fragil bank kiel work paper kiel institut world economi forthcom journal monetari econom d beau l clerc b mojon macroprudenti polici conduct monetari polici banqu de franc occasion paper summari literatur provid european central bank report first two year macroprudenti research network frankfurt octob us bank close fdic septemb decemb also advantag bank supervis combin monetari polici within one institut exampl role monetari polici central bank need assess macroeconomi linkag financi sector impli natur systemicmacroprudenti orient orient larg absent tradit supervisori practic central bank also cultur use econom analysi research typic exist bare exist supervisori author see e g p dasgupta c goodhart d schoenmak skill profil central banker supervisor european financ review moreov role central bank payment settlement system frequent contact bank market oper provid addit sourc inform relev financi stabil exampl literatur heller prudenti supervis monetari polici frenkel j m goldstein ed essay honor jacqu j polak intern monetari fund c goodhart d schoenmak institut separ supervisori monetari agenc giorn econ c goodhart d schoenmak function monetari polici bank supervis separ oxford econom paper di giorgio di noia bank supervis monetari polici task given differ agenc intern financ gerlach bank fiscal union introductori remark panel session eui confer state play euro area fix emu long term florenc januari argument put forward m brunnermei h gersbach true independ ecb trigger power less voxeu decemb european central bank b opinion european central bank novemb propos council regul confer specif task european central bank concern polici relat prudenti supervis credit institut propos regul european parliament council amend regul eu establish european supervisori author european bank author con european central bank c toward bank union financi stabil review decemb eijffing r nijsken monetari polici bank supervis voxeu decemb reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en