"Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The interplay of banking, financial intermediation and regulation",27-09-2010,European Central Bank,ECB,3372,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,It is a real pleasure for me to speak today at the 13th Conference of the ECB-CFS Research Network on “Macro-prudential Regulation as an Approach to Contain Systemic Risk”.The Roman senator and historian Tacitus tells us that in 33 A.D. the Roman Empire suffered a major financial crisis. The trigger was a re-establishment of laws that Julius Caesar had introduced as a war measure in 49 B.C. to prevent the flight of capital abroad and the fall of land values. After having been disregarded for a long time the re-introduction of the laws, which forced lenders to invest a large share of their capital in domestic real estate, triggered a scramble for money as many loans were called in. The disastrous effect was a postponement of investment and a fall in real estate values, compounded by investors withholding funding in view of the prospect of finding better bargains in a falling market. The crisis was eventually ended when Emperor Tiberius arranged for three-year interest free loans to investors. Although the global crisis of the last few years had little to do with drastic measures of war financing of the Roman kind, the involvement of real estate, elements of the transmission and aspects of the resolution still sound familiar. These analogies are not isolated examples. The long list of financial crises in human history and their parallels over time have been extensively documented. [1] One of the key issues – today and in history – has been that there were limited means to contain the systemic dimension of crises. Hence, the recent focus on macro-prudential supervision and the topic chosen for this conference. The regulation of systemic risk is very topical. In my remarks today, I would like to look a bit more at the issue how financial regulation should react to instances of widespread or systemic instability. I shall do that from two angles: First, I want to look back at regulatory reactions in the past, namely the Glass-Steagall Act in the United States and the establishment of the Basel Committee and its standards at the international level, and, second, I want to consider the particular challenges we are facing for the current regulatory reforms.One prominent example is the regulatory reaction to the stock market crash in 1929, which resulted in the establishment of the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933. The Act was to a large extent motivated by concerns about the role of banks in the run up to the Great Depression and in particular about conflicts of interest between the lending, underwriting and proprietary trading functions. Therefore, the Glass Steagall Act banned commercial banks from underwriting, holding or dealing in corporate securities, hence essentially separating investment from commercial banks.The Act not only had a major impact on the evolution of banking in the US, but also worldwide. For instance, the emergence of large US investment banks, also with dependencies in Europe, is a direct consequence from the implementation of this Act. The Act also affected the supervision of banks worldwide. Owing to their funding structure based on deposits by many small and relatively uninformed agents, hence the possibility of a bank run and their involvement in the payment system, commercial banks were regulated relatively heavily. In contrast, investment banks were regarded to need less close public monitoring and regulation, as they were seen to be less important from an overall financial stability perspective and mostly the domain of sophisticated investors. However, the crisis has shown that all actors in the financial system contributed to the build up of systemic risk. Research on the pre-Glass-Steagall-era in the United States provides evidence that securities underwritten by commercial banks’ subsidiaries did not have a higher probability of default than those underwritten by investment banks. [2] However, whether the Glass Steagall Act has contributed or not to financial stability is an open question. Nonetheless, in 1999, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act repealed the Glass Steagall Act on the grounds that this would allow banks to become more competitive, attain favorable economies of scope and diversify their sources of income. However, the recent regulatory reform in the US under the Frank-Dodd Bill has re-introduced some restrictions on proprietary trading by deposit taking institutions. A regulatory response with a worldwide impact on regulatory standards and banks’ business was the creation of the Basel Committee. The failure of the German Herstatt bank led to serious spill-overs to the US banking sector. In late 1974, central bankers from Canada, Japan, the US and 9 European countries founded a new body at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel, which became later known as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. This new organization was founded on the understanding that the increasing cross-border activities of banks and the associated risk that financial instability would be transmitted across borders required improvements in the quality of supervision and regulation globally as well as greater international cooperation in this field. Over the years it has increasingly developed into a standard-setting body and although its standards – such as Basel I and Basel II – are not legally enforceable they have in fact become the worldwide benchmark. The list of factors that contributed to the financial crisis is long. However, irrespective of the multiplicity of factors, we had to realize that the provisions put in place by Basel I and Basel II were not sufficient to ensure the necessary resilience of the banking sector needed to withstand a situation like the one we are currently facing.In my view, the major lessons from the current crisis for any future regulatory policy are the following: First, Basel II rested on the principle that the purpose of regulation is to ensure the safety and soundness of individual financial institutions against the risk of loss on their assets. However ensuring the soundness of each individual institution does not necessarily ensure the soundness of the financial system as a whole.Second, the crisis has highlighted that the main types of risk, notably credit, market and liquidity risk are ultimately linked, and that funding liquidity of banks is an essential element of determining their resilience. Awareness about the importance of regulating liquidity risk was limited until the crisis brought it to the fore.And third, part of banks’ risk taking activities were left to other, non-bank entities of the financial system and, thus, these activities were able to escape the regulatory web that had been built for banks. Already from these three points we see how the lessons learnt lead us to the systemic dimension of supervision and regulation.So let me turn to the challenges of the current regulatory reform to discuss what is needed to prevent or contain financial instabilities and systemic crises in the future. These challenges concern three major fields: (i) classic bank regulation, (ii) market and infrastructure regulation, and (iii) systemic risk regulation.Concerning the bank regulation, major progress has been made. The Basel Committee has just published the regulatory reform package known as Basel III. It addresses the weaknesses brought to the fore by the crisis. The aim of the Basel III reform is to enhance capital regulation and to introduce liquidity regulation. In particular the Basel Committee proposes: first, to improve the quality and quantity of capital, especially Tier-1 capital to improve loss-absorption on a going concern basis; second, to introduce a non-risk-based leverage ratio as a supplementary measure to the Basel II risk control framework; third, to introduce capital buffers and forward-looking provisioning to ensure that the financial system absorbs the shocks and thus lowers the volatility of the financial and real economic cycles; finally, to elevate resilience of financial institutions to liquidity stresses by introducing a liquidity risk framework, improving liquidity risk management and harmonising liquidity risk supervision. The significance of internationally coordinated oversight and the cross-border web of dependencies in the financial system are exemplified by systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) that often operate internationally. These played a major role in both the impact and the transmission of the crisis. In order to increase long term financial stability there is the need to reduce the moral hazard they exhibit. To address this, policy recommendations are being developed that include: (i) a framework for measuring an institution’s systemic importance, (ii) resolution tools and frameworks for the effective resolution of financial failures without taxpayers ultimately bearing the burden, as well as (iii) prudential and structural policy tools to reduce the probability and impact of SIFI’s failure.Looking further ahead, important challenges remain to improve banking sector stability:  First, banks’ business models need to become more sustainable. In my view, banks’ business strategy should not be directed towards increasing short-term profits by way of taking on extensive risks to the detriment of the long term viability of their business. In fact, the level of announced profit targets and their impact on peer banks has also to be seen from the perspective that higher profits mean higher risk taking and, hence, do not necessarily originate from efficiency gains alone.  Second, I believe that it is crucial for banks to undergo a serious reform of their corporate governance and compensation schemes. In particular, the incentives of traders, CEOs and creditors of the bank should adequately reflect the risks involved so as to internalize the costs of their risk taking and potential failure. This can be achieved through appropriate compensation schemes, more transparency vis-à-vis creditors and shareholders and generally improved oversight of banks’ business. Overall, the managing board of a bank has to shift the focus away from short-term objectives towards a longer term corporate strategy. This also includes being more accountable for the risk taking of the overall business of the bank, which brings me to the next challenge.   Third, risk management practises need to be improved. Most risk management techniques – not just used by banks but also by rating agencies – neglected the correlations of risks across securities and did not sufficiently internalize the growing systemic (credit, market and liquidity) risks. [3] Moreover, banks underestimated tail risk. The existing risk management techniques worked well at predicting small day-to-day losses under normal circumstances but failed to predict severe losses that are very infrequent. However, it is exactly those severe losses that matter the most. Therefore, banks need to devote greater attention to their risk management. This means in particular that the risk management function needs to receive a more prominent role in the organizational structure, specifically with respect to authority and independence. Concerning the regulation of financial markets, the crisis has clearly shown that turbulences in one segment of financial markets can create spill-overs and contagion to other segments. Moreover, we have seen that both banks and other types of financial intermediaries had been seriously affected by the financial crisis. Therefore, I welcome the recent agreement to establish three pan-European micro-prudential supervisory authorities – the European Banking Authority (EBA), the European Securities Markets Authority (ESMA) and the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA). They are expected to become operational at the beginning of next year. With regard to the regulation of market infrastructures, let me first say that I see it as a great achievement that market infrastructures have fared very well. They were able to withstand the shock-waves of the current crisis and continued to ensure the clearing and settlement of financial transactions. Thus, they contributed critically to containing the spreading of financial instability.This resilience, however, was not a “dues ex machine”. It was the outcome of well designed international standards for market infrastructures. Still, we need to closely analyse the lessons from the crisis also in this area – e.g. in terms of market infrastructure risk management and transparency and the arrangements for cross-border cooperation among authorities. These lessons will be incorporated in the global CPSS-IOSCO recommendations for financial market infrastructures to be issued early next year.Despite the good performance of market infrastructures, there is a need to further develop highly resilient market infrastructures, particularly in the field of OTC derivatives. The crisis showed that legislation, supervision and oversight of global derivatives market arrangements need to be improved – and that this needs to be done in a consistent way globally. Following agreement by the G20 on high-level objectives, new legislation has recently been introduced in the US and is in an advanced stage in the European Union. Such legislation stipulates, inter alia, that all OTC derivatives trades will need to be reported to trade repositories and to the extent possible be subject to central clearing via a central counterparty (CCP). Overall, also with regard to regulating markets and infrastructures, important challenges remain: First, striving for more transparency in financial markets. The activities in the shadow banking sector and the over-the-counter business have contributed tremendously to the creation of uncertainties and opaque transmission channels for risks. Therefore, a central goal for any future regulatory action should the improvement of market transparency. Clearing of OTC derivatives via CCPs, the reporting of derivative trade data to trade repositories and the recent proposal by the European Commission to increase transparency for shortselling activities are important steps in the right direction.  Second, dealing with financial innovation. Independently of the doubtless benefits of financial innovation, it poses a constant challenge to regulators, supervisors and overseers of financial markets and infrastructures. The banking business is in a constant state of flux with new financial instruments constantly being developed and traded. New techniques and instruments have been developed, particularly to diversify and trade credit risk, making markets more complex and sometimes less transparent. For example, the risks involved in the so-called “Originate to Distribute” model - an intermediation approach in which banks originate, repackage and then sell their loans (or other assets such as bonds or credit risk exposures) on to the financial market - was insufficiently recognized by market participants and supervisory authorities. Therefore, financial innovation and growing complexity mean that market participants and authorities need to constantly build up in-depth knowledge of financial innovations and broaden their analysis across the whole spectrum of financial market actions.  Third, minimization of risk transmission between institutions and markets. Given the resilience of market infrastructures in the current crisis, we need to further strengthen and encourage their use. Moreover, the crisis has shown that the exclusive focus on banks has proven insufficient as contagion has also occurred across different types of financial intermediaries, such as insurance companies and money market funds. Therefore, looking forward it will be crucial that the cross border cooperation between authorities be further strengthened. In this respect the work of the newly created European Supervisory Authorities will be key. Looking more into the interrelation between markets from a systemic perspective will be another key task, which brings me to the third major field of regulatory challenge, namely regulating systemic risk.As indicated, traditional banking regulation was designed to limit each individual institution's risk seen in isolation. It did not sufficiently focus on systemic risk, put simply, the risk of a simultaneous collapse of institutions.Institutionally, significant progress has been made in the strengthening of macro- and micro-prudential supervision. In Europe, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) and – as mentioned - three pan-European micro Supervisors will be established. The ESRB will provide a thorough analysis of systemic risks to the financial system in the European Union and will issue warnings if significant risks are identified. It will also provide policy recommendations to address these risks and prevent a renewed build-up of excessive risk in the financial system as a whole. With its involvement in the ESRB, the ECB will continue to play an active role in safeguarding financial stability in Europe. The ECB Vice President will go into greater detail at tonight’s conference dinner on how we are preparing for that task. The main challenges that I see ahead in the area of regulating systemic risk are as follows: First, determining the perimeter of regulation. It is important that the regulatory web is cast wide enough to ensure that all systemically important institutions, markets and products are captured. Caution is also necessary to avoid that tighter regulation simply shifts activities to unregulated market segments or entities. Therefore, the steps taken towards more harmonised banking supervision as well as the progress made in Europe towards a Directive on alternative investment fund managers, which affect financial markets through their tight web of interlinkages with the financial sector, are appreciated.  Second, ensuring the availability of information and data. The detection and the early warning on systemic risk crucially depends on the quality and the availability of relevant data as well as on the adequate assessment of the risk bearing capacity of the system. Therefore it is important that information is made available that can feed into future assessments of systemic risk, especially in view of this being a key input into the working of the newly founded ESRB. In this regard, it will be equally important that the use of qualitative data and market information is strengthened and that this information will be fed into the regular analysis of systemic risk in a more systematic way. And third, measuring systemic risk. A basic difficulty in regulating system risk relate to the difficulty in measuring the contribution of individual institutions to systemic risk. The importance of an institution for systemic risk is a function of its size, interconnectedness and substitutability. One way for regulators and private markets to be able to monitor financial institutions and to assess their systemic reach, is to assess the risk of multiple defaults. Measuring such risk is difficult, as measures may be too backward looking or face data limitations..I am happy that after the break we will have the chance to hear about the latest advances on how to measure systemic risk in the keynote speech by Professor Robert Engle from New York University. He has developed a measure of systemic risk capturing the systemic impact of an individual institution’s shortfall and which is published in the so-called NYU Stern Systemic Risk Ranking. The keynote speech will be followed by two outstanding papers on measuring systemic risk. Kim and Giesecke will present a paper estimating systemic risk on the basis of actual defaults and the timing of their occurrence. The paper by Yang and Zhou goes beyond the usual focus on the existence of contagion and will present an analysis of the pattern of propagation across financial institutions. For an illustration showing how big the challenge to identify systemic risk is, one does not need to go back very far in history. In 2003, a young analyst in New York stated the following: “You just have to watch for the level at which a nearly unlimited or unprecedented credit growth can no longer drive housing markets higher. I am extremely bearish and feel the consequence could be a 50% drop in residential real estate in the US. A large portion of the current [housing] demand at current prices would disappear if only people were convinced that prices were not rising. The collateral damage is likely to be of orders of magnitude worse than anyone now considers” [4]It took another 4 years that these risks and, particularly, the systemic impact and costs materialized. Analyzing systemic risk means, therefore, mainly going beyond mainstream thinking and challenging widespread beliefs. We are in need of the type of analyst I just quoted. I am very much looking forward to hearing this conference’s analysis on the containment of such systemic risk, the future challenges and the possible policy options we have going forward. [1]See, for example, Kindleberger (1978), Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, New York: Basic Books, Garber (2000), Famous First Bubbles: The Fundamentals of Early Manias, Cambridge: MIT Press, or Reinhart and Rogoff (2009), This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, Princeton: Princeton University Press.[2]Puri, M. (1999), “Universal banks as underwriters: Implications for the going public process”, Journal of Financial Economics, 54, 133-163. Kroszner, R.S. and R.G. Rajan (1994), “Is the Glass Steagall Act Justified? A study of the US experience with universal banking before 1933”, American Economic Review, 84, 810-832.[3]Danielsson, Jon, Paul Embrechts, Charles Goodhart, Con Keating, Felix Muennich, Olivier Renault and Hyun Song Shin (2001) “ An Academic Response to Basel II’’ Financial Market Group special paper 130, London School of Economics.[4]Quote from M. Lewis, The big short, 2010Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen real pleasur speak today th confer ecbcf research network macroprudenti regul approach contain system risk roman senat historian tacitus tell us d roman empir suffer major financi crisi trigger reestablish law julius caesar introduc war measur b c prevent flight capit abroad fall land valu disregard long time reintroduct law forc lender invest larg share capit domest real estat trigger scrambl money mani loan call disastr effect postpon invest fall real estat valu compound investor withhold fund view prospect find better bargain fall market crisi eventu end emperor tiberius arrang threeyear interest free loan investor although global crisi last year littl drastic measur war financ roman kind involv real estat element transmiss aspect resolut still sound familiar analog isol exampl long list financi crise human histori parallel time extens document one key issu today histori limit mean contain system dimens crise henc recent focus macroprudenti supervis topic chosen confer regul system risk topic remark today would like look bit issu financi regul react instanc widespread system instabl shall two angl first want look back regulatori reaction past name glasssteagal act unit state establish basel committe standard intern level second want consid particular challeng face current regulatori reform one promin exampl regulatori reaction stock market crash result establish glasssteagal act act larg extent motiv concern role bank run great depress particular conflict interest lend underwrit proprietari trade function therefor glass steagal act ban commerci bank underwrit hold deal corpor secur henc essenti separ invest commerci bank act major impact evolut bank us also worldwid instanc emerg larg us invest bank also depend europ direct consequ implement act act also affect supervis bank worldwid owe fund structur base deposit mani small relat uninform agent henc possibl bank run involv payment system commerci bank regul relat heavili contrast invest bank regard need less close public monitor regul seen less import overal financi stabil perspect most domain sophist investor howev crisi shown actor financi system contribut build system risk research preglasssteagallera unit state provid evid secur underwritten commerci bank subsidiari higher probabl default underwritten invest bank howev whether glass steagal act contribut financi stabil open question nonetheless grammleachbliley act repeal glass steagal act ground would allow bank becom competit attain favor economi scope diversifi sourc incom howev recent regulatori reform us frankdodd bill reintroduc restrict proprietari trade deposit take institut regulatori respons worldwid impact regulatori standard bank busi creation basel committe failur german herstatt bank led serious spillov us bank sector late central banker canada japan us european countri found new bodi bank intern settlement basel becam later known basel committe bank supervis new organ found understand increas crossbord activ bank associ risk financi instabl would transmit across border requir improv qualiti supervis regul global well greater intern cooper field year increas develop standardset bodi although standard basel basel ii legal enforc fact becom worldwid benchmark list factor contribut financi crisi long howev irrespect multipl factor realiz provis put place basel basel ii suffici ensur necessari resili bank sector need withstand situat like one current face view major lesson current crisi futur regulatori polici follow first basel ii rest principl purpos regul ensur safeti sound individu financi institut risk loss asset howev ensur sound individu institut necessarili ensur sound financi system whole second crisi highlight main type risk notabl credit market liquid risk ultim link fund liquid bank essenti element determin resili awar import regul liquid risk limit crisi brought fore third part bank risk take activ left nonbank entiti financi system thus activ abl escap regulatori web built bank alreadi three point see lesson learnt lead us system dimens supervis regul let turn challeng current regulatori reform discuss need prevent contain financi instabl system crise futur challeng concern three major field classic bank regul ii market infrastructur regul iii system risk regul concern bank regul major progress made basel committe publish regulatori reform packag known basel iii address weak brought fore crisi aim basel iii reform enhanc capit regul introduc liquid regul particular basel committe propos first improv qualiti quantiti capit especi tier capit improv lossabsorpt go concern basi second introduc nonriskbas leverag ratio supplementari measur basel ii risk control framework third introduc capit buffer forwardlook provis ensur financi system absorb shock thus lower volatil financi real econom cycl final elev resili financi institut liquid stress introduc liquid risk framework improv liquid risk manag harmonis liquid risk supervis signific intern coordin oversight crossbord web depend financi system exemplifi system import financi institut sifi often oper intern play major role impact transmiss crisi order increas long term financi stabil need reduc moral hazard exhibit address polici recommend develop includ framework measur institut system import ii resolut tool framework effect resolut financi failur without taxpay ultim bear burden well iii prudenti structur polici tool reduc probabl impact sifi failur look ahead import challeng remain improv bank sector stabil first bank busi model need becom sustain view bank busi strategi direct toward increas shortterm profit way take extens risk detriment long term viabil busi fact level announc profit target impact peer bank also seen perspect higher profit mean higher risk take henc necessarili origin effici gain alon second believ crucial bank undergo serious reform corpor govern compens scheme particular incent trader ceo creditor bank adequ reflect risk involv intern cost risk take potenti failur achiev appropri compens scheme transpar visàvi creditor sharehold general improv oversight bank busi overal manag board bank shift focus away shortterm object toward longer term corpor strategi also includ account risk take overal busi bank bring next challeng third risk manag practis need improv risk manag techniqu use bank also rate agenc neglect correl risk across secur suffici intern grow system credit market liquid risk moreov bank underestim tail risk exist risk manag techniqu work well predict small daytoday loss normal circumst fail predict sever loss infrequ howev exact sever loss matter therefor bank need devot greater attent risk manag mean particular risk manag function need receiv promin role organiz structur specif respect author independ concern regul financi market crisi clear shown turbul one segment financi market creat spillov contagion segment moreov seen bank type financi intermediari serious affect financi crisi therefor welcom recent agreement establish three paneuropean microprudenti supervisori author european bank author eba european secur market author esma european insur occup pension author eiopa expect becom oper begin next year regard regul market infrastructur let first say see great achiev market infrastructur fare well abl withstand shockwav current crisi continu ensur clear settlement financi transact thus contribut critic contain spread financi instabl resili howev due ex machin outcom well design intern standard market infrastructur still need close analys lesson crisi also area e g term market infrastructur risk manag transpar arrang crossbord cooper among author lesson incorpor global cpssiosco recommend financi market infrastructur issu earli next year despit good perform market infrastructur need develop high resili market infrastructur particular field otc deriv crisi show legisl supervis oversight global deriv market arrang need improv need done consist way global follow agreement g highlevel object new legisl recent introduc us advanc stage european union legisl stipul inter alia otc deriv trade need report trade repositori extent possibl subject central clear via central counterparti ccp overal also regard regul market infrastructur import challeng remain first strive transpar financi market activ shadow bank sector overthecount busi contribut tremend creation uncertainti opaqu transmiss channel risk therefor central goal futur regulatori action improv market transpar clear otc deriv via ccps report deriv trade data trade repositori recent propos european commiss increas transpar shortsel activ import step right direct second deal financi innov independ doubtless benefit financi innov pose constant challeng regul supervisor overs financi market infrastructur bank busi constant state flux new financi instrument constant develop trade new techniqu instrument develop particular diversifi trade credit risk make market complex sometim less transpar exampl risk involv socal origin distribut model intermedi approach bank origin repackag sell loan asset bond credit risk exposur financi market insuffici recogn market particip supervisori author therefor financi innov grow complex mean market particip author need constant build indepth knowledg financi innov broaden analysi across whole spectrum financi market action third minim risk transmiss institut market given resili market infrastructur current crisi need strengthen encourag use moreov crisi shown exclus focus bank proven insuffici contagion also occur across differ type financi intermediari insur compani money market fund therefor look forward crucial cross border cooper author strengthen respect work newli creat european supervisori author key look interrel market system perspect anoth key task bring third major field regulatori challeng name regul system risk indic tradit bank regul design limit individu institut risk seen isol suffici focus system risk put simpli risk simultan collaps institut institut signific progress made strengthen macro microprudenti supervis europ european system risk board esrb mention three paneuropean micro supervisor establish esrb provid thorough analysi system risk financi system european union issu warn signific risk identifi also provid polici recommend address risk prevent renew buildup excess risk financi system whole involv esrb ecb continu play activ role safeguard financi stabil europ ecb vice presid go greater detail tonight confer dinner prepar task main challeng see ahead area regul system risk follow first determin perimet regul import regulatori web cast wide enough ensur system import institut market product captur caution also necessari avoid tighter regul simpli shift activ unregul market segment entiti therefor step taken toward harmonis bank supervis well progress made europ toward direct altern invest fund manag affect financi market tight web interlinkag financi sector appreci second ensur avail inform data detect earli warn system risk crucial depend qualiti avail relev data well adequ assess risk bear capac system therefor import inform made avail feed futur assess system risk especi view key input work newli found esrb regard equal import use qualit data market inform strengthen inform fed regular analysi system risk systemat way third measur system risk basic difficulti regul system risk relat difficulti measur contribut individu institut system risk import institut system risk function size interconnected substitut one way regul privat market abl monitor financi institut assess system reach assess risk multipl default measur risk difficult measur may backward look face data limit happi break chanc hear latest advanc measur system risk keynot speech professor robert engl new york univers develop measur system risk captur system impact individu institut shortfal publish socal nyu stern system risk rank keynot speech follow two outstand paper measur system risk kim gieseck present paper estim system risk basi actual default time occurr paper yang zhou goe beyond usual focus exist contagion present analysi pattern propag across financi institut illustr show big challeng identifi system risk one need go back far histori young analyst new york state follow watch level near unlimit unpreced credit growth longer drive hous market higher extrem bearish feel consequ could drop residenti real estat us larg portion current hous demand current price would disappear peopl convinc price rise collater damag like order magnitud wors anyon consid took anoth year risk particular system impact cost materi analyz system risk mean therefor main go beyond mainstream think challeng widespread belief need type analyst quot much look forward hear confer analysi contain system risk futur challeng possibl polici option go forward see exampl kindleberg mania panic crash histori financi crise new york basic book garber famous first bubbl fundament earli mania cambridg mit press reinhart rogoff time differ eight centuri financi folli princeton princeton univers press puri m univers bank underwrit implic go public process journal financi econom kroszner r r g rajan glass steagal act justifi studi us experi univers bank american econom review danielsson jon paul embrecht charl goodhart con keat felix muennich olivi renault hyun song shin academ respons basel ii financi market group special paper london school econom quot m lewi big short reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en