Jean-Claude Trichet: Competitiveness and the smooth functioning of EMU,23-02-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,5289,"<p>What should we understand by the concept of competitiveness, what does it mean in particular for the euro area – and how should we act upon it? These are the questions I would like to explore with you today. They are questions I have been contemplating all my life as an economic policy-maker. [1] And they are questions that are central to the future of the national economies of Europe – and of particular importance among those that constitute our Economic and Monetary Union.Competitiveness is a difficult idea to nail down decisively and is commonly used to depict very different things – from securing export market shares, through taxation of corporate profits, indexation of wages and investment in high-tech, to boosting productivity growth. In my view, the appropriate definition of competitiveness is a country’s ability to achieve sustainable improvements in the economic living standards and job opportunities of its citizens in an open economy. Therefore, competitiveness is about the entirety of our economic lives in a time of globalisation. It is obvious that being successful in terms of price and cost competitiveness is one key condition for enhancing living standards and job creation in open economies. Exports are naturally an important part of the picture. But all sectors of our economies are involved in competitiveness. Public goods and services – and private goods and services. Tradable goods and services – and non-tradable goods and services. Financial services firms – firms active in all parts of the real economy – and households and governments. As diverse and multifaceted as our countries are, as manifold are the means of achieving sustainable long-term economic growth and job creation. The objective of achieving sustainable long-term growth in an open economy is both European and global. It has to do with the thriving of nations within Europe, as well as within the global economy that is undergoing very rapid structural changes. The European Union is the world’s largest economy and trading partner. It is therefore very appropriate that it has designed its own strategy of developing its growth potential in tomorrow’s global economy. This strategy, called Europe 2020, is focusing on three main areas: education, research and innovation; resource efficiency; and high employment and social cohesion. These elements are all relevant for Europe’s competitiveness in a global economy, and the ECB fully supports the Europe 2020 strategy. Today, I would like to focus on the aspect of competitiveness that is internal to Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union, i.e. the euro area. In such a union, competitiveness must be examined at national levels, with a view to take into account in particular the very high level of interdependence between economies created by the single currency. Therefore, competitiveness is not only about raising our economic living standards: it is also about strengthening the cohesion of the economic union. I will therefore focus my remarks on what arrangements of competitiveness surveillance we need in the euro area, and how this could be further enshrined in the current economic governance framework that is examined by the EU Council and the European Parliament. In an economic and monetary union, it is of the essence, by implementing sound economic and fiscal policies, to avoid too large and too sustained divergences. That is why the Treaty devotes an entire chapter to the “economic policies” of the union, with a particular focus on countries that have adopted the single currency. In an economic and monetary union, the Member States must develop and share a common economic understanding of mutual surveillance. This common understanding of the implications of being members of a currency union should ensure that structural features of the economies help them to preserve their relative competitive position in an open environment while ensuring collective stability. Such collective stability, as opposed to sustained and large imbalances, implies in particular that macroeconomic policies need to be fully consistent with a stability-oriented monetary policy. I should emphasise that this in no way means that competitiveness or avoiding internal imbalances is about making everybody look the same. The economic diversity that we enjoy in Europe is an asset that we should seek to strengthen rather than dissipate. What matters, however, is that diversity does not lead to large, persistent divergences. To prevent such divergences from arising, we need a common framework that ensures that all Member States – within their specific national settings – stay committed to regain, when necessary, consolidate and preserve their relative competitiveness.Misguided national economic policies can lead to the emergence of excessive competitiveness gaps between the members of the currency union. The primary symptoms of such competitive gaps are usually mounting current account deficits, significant accumulated differences in indicators of price and cost competitiveness, leading, in particular, to inflation rates persistently above the euro area common objective. Such developments are also associated with tensions, painful adjustment processes and spillovers for other members. It is for these reasons that the European Central Bank (ECB) regularly provides analysis and insight into the importance of competitiveness for Economic and Monetary Union. Indeed, it is now five and a half years since the ECB injected an analysis of relative competitiveness into the European policy surveillance. When, around 2005, the signs of imbalances and divergences in key nominal developments, in particular in prices, costs and wages, started to accumulate significantly, the Governing Council sent the first analysis to the Eurogroup. The focus was on price and cost developments in individual countries; the message was one of divergence that warranted interpretation, assessment and policy action. At the same time, an ESCB Task Force was set up to look more deeply into competitiveness issues of the individual euro area countries. [2]Ever since, the ECB has provided updates of the analysis to the Eurogroup. The information on unit labour costs, productivity and sectoral wage developments in euro area countries have become a recurrent theme distributed at these meetings. Since 2007, the ECB has undertaken regular, comprehensive competitiveness reviews of developments in individual euro area countries. And in 2010, the ECB provided a detailed outline of how the Governing Council envisages a competitiveness framework for the euro area. In my remarks tonight, I would like to focus on the main issues at stake – for national economies in general and for members of the euro area in particular. I will begin by reminding you of some of the stylised facts that have characterised economic developments in the euro area over the past 12 years, as well as some of the fallacies about competitiveness that I have encountered over the years.I will then outline the key elements of a framework for analysis and action on competitiveness, and subsequently discuss the implications for the current proposals on the strengthening of macroeconomic surveillance from a euro area perspective. Let me give you some stylised facts about macroeconomic developments in the euro area over the past decade or so. For now, I will just provide you with the data, without going into their causes and policy implications. [3] Between 1999 and 2009, nominal unit labour costs grew by 24% in cumulative terms in the euro area as a whole. In Austria and Germany they grew by 13% and 8%, respectively; in Greece and Ireland, they grew by 34% and 38%, respectively. Between 1999 and 2009, public sector wages in the euro area grew by close to 40%. In Germany, they grew by 19%; in Ireland and in Greece, they grew by more than 100%, roughly 50 percentage points more than private sector wages. Between 1999 and 2007, residential property prices in the euro area rose on average by around 6% per year. In Greece they rose on average by 9.5% each year; in Ireland they rose each year by almost 12%.  Household indebtedness in the euro area average rose from about 50% of GDP in 1999 to about 65% of GDP in 2009, an increase of about 30% over the period. It doubled in the economies with the highest increase. These are some illustrative facts. Let me now turn to some fallacies that I hear sometimes when discussing these and similar facts. Discussions on competitiveness often reveal misconceptions or fallacies that, in my view, are wrongly guiding the debate.  Fallacy No 1: “Only the tradable sector matters for competitiveness”, some say. “There is no problem with the competitiveness of our economy: companies in the exporting sector are doing well, prices are low and profits are good.”  Fallacy No 2: “Public wage developments do not affect an economy’s competitiveness”, some say. “Since the public sector is sheltered from international competition, developments in public sector pay have little connection with the private sector and certainly not with the international competitiveness of companies.”  Fallacy No 3: “Let’s discount wage and cost developments with the (relatively) high current domestic inflation rate and we get a benign picture”, some say. “Our wage increases of 6% are fully justified because we have 2% productivity and 4% inflation; moreover, the higher inflation rate is purely a catching-up phenomenon because we are growing so fast.”  Fallacy No 4: “Intra-euro area current accounts don’t matter”, some say. “The current account balance reflects inter-temporal optimisation of savers and investors; moreover, current account deficits are good as they reflect capital inflows, attracted by higher returns.”  Fallacy No 5: “Fiscal consolidation can harm competitiveness”, some say. “Fiscal consolidation is going to have dampening effects on growth and can weaken competitiveness, which requires substantial government expenditure.” So if these points are fallacies, what is the right strategy for economies in general and the euro area in particular? Let me share with you my reflections on five key elements of what I think is the correct diagnosis: First, the non-tradable sector is essential for the competitiveness of an economy. Hence, we must look at all sectors when assessing competitiveness. Second, wage developments in the public sector are much more important than is generally realised. Therefore, the public sector must set its compensation levels with the implications for the whole economy in mind; it must be aware of its role model. Third, less than 2% but close to 2% over the medium term – namely the level of medium-term inflation that is ensured as an average in the euro area by the ECB – is the right benchmark to use for all countries to calculate competitiveness indicators in real terms. Hence, one must not be misled by temporary inflation differentials into price-wage spirals which would be very detrimental for employment. Fourth, the current account balance is an important summary indicator that may signal losses of competitiveness and emerging imbalances. As a result, policy-makers should monitor this balance closely, and especially the related external debt accumulation. And finally, sound public finances are a pre-condition for sustained competitiveness. This is yet a further reason for fiscal solidity. Let me elaborate on each of these elements. There are two main reasons why the non-tradable sector is essential for an economy’s competitiveness. First, non-tradable goods and non-tradable services are important inputs for the production of tradable goods. Hence, rising prices in the non-tradable sector push up costs in the tradable sector. Second, price and unit labour cost increases in the non-tradable sector will ultimately lead to upward pressure on unit labour costs in the tradable sector (López-Salido et al., 2005). This second-round effect pushes up the productions costs of tradable goods and reduces the competitiveness of the tradable sector. There is some recent evidence that those countries with higher growth of unit labour costs in services and construction than in industry and manufacturing have experienced a worsening of their current accounts (see, for example, Zemanek et al., 2010). If unit labour costs in the non-tradable sector persistently exceed those in the tradable sector, firms in export industries may see themselves forced to squeeze their profit margins because they are unable to pass on higher input prices to world prices. Price and cost pressures from an expanding non-tradable sector induce exporters to reduce their margins. Thus, at first, the exporting industry might not be doing too badly and export prices remain unaffected. But the industry is gradually getting squeezed, rather than expanding. This not only reduces the relative weight of exporters in the economy, but also the overall growth potential. In the euro area, the government wage bill accounts, on average, for more than 10% of GDP and more than 20% of the total compensation of employees. It is already clear from the sheer size of this sector that public wage increases can have a very important signalling effect for private sector wage negotiations. The larger the public sector is, compared with the tradable sector, the stronger will be the signal for wages in the private sector, and therefore the influence on the unit labour costs in the private sector, taking due account of productivity developments. Hence, the larger the public sector, the more important, and the more challenging, will be its role in the overall evolution of cost competitiveness. Evidence reveals an important influence from public sector wages to private wages in many euro area countries. Public wage spillovers seem to be particularly important in countries that have experienced high and volatile public wage growth. Thus, rapid increases in unit labour costs and severe losses in intra-euro area competitiveness do not come as a surprise in these countries (Pérez and Sanchez, 2010 and Holm-Hadulla et al., 2010). In the euro area, the average annual inflation rate over the first 12 years of the euro was 1.97%. This outcome is in line with the ECB’s definition of price stability of below, but close to, 2%. This definition is deeply entrenched in medium to long-term inflation expectations, which confirms the ECB’s credibility and the public’s confidence in the ECB’s ability to deliver price stability over the medium term. The ECB therefore provides the nominal anchor for future price developments in the euro area as a whole. Now, in a currency union, it is a natural phenomenon that Member States, at times, have different inflation rates. These differences can result from some differences in the economic development level of Member States, their position in the business cycle or their dependence on trade and hence global developments. So temporary deviations from the euro area-wide inflation average should not be a matter of concern. Indeed, they constitute an important potential adjustment channel within a currency union where exchange rates are fixed. But inflation differentials can turn into a source of concern when they become large and persistent. For a significant period of time, persistent above area-wide inflation rates in some Member States had been regarded by some economists as justified on the grounds of catching-up effects. The argument is that lower-income countries usually import productivity gains in the tradable sector, which in turn leads to higher economy-wide inflation due to the adjustment of nominal wages across sectors. This is the Balassa-Samuelson effect. But increasingly evidence suggests that this effect has been overstressed as an explanation for inflation differentials in the euro area. In some cases, these differentials were not driven by healthy catching-up effects, but were largely the outcome of inappropriate macroeconomic policies and debt-financed booms in domestic demand. Thus a medium-term inflation rate of somewhat below 2% over the medium term is the appropriate benchmark also at the national level. Unit labour costs, and therefore developments in compensation, after having taken due account of the labour productivity increases, need to be consistent with this in order to avoid a rise in unemployment. Moreover, using contemporaneous (or lagged) inflation as a benchmark for wages can lead to a nominal persistent spiralling of both compensation and inflation over and above the average of the euro area. This would lead to a progressive loss of cost competitiveness and higher unemployment. This is why central bankers are in general against indexation, including wage indexation, particularly in a single currency area. For the record, let me first stress that a current account deficit, just like a current account surplus, does not necessarily point to economic malfunctioning. Indeed, it can be optimal for a country, given the macroeconomic conditions. This is also true in a monetary union, where some differences in national current account balances are a normal feature. Capital flows, for example, may be favouring Member States with better growth prospects and higher expected returns, related to catching-up processes and successful structural reforms, and current account balances may diverge across countries as a natural result of responses to asymmetric shocks. Increasingly, however, larger current account deficits, in combination with significant losses in competitiveness, high levels of private and public indebtedness and overheating in non-tradable sectors, may signal domestic macroeconomic imbalances and deeper structural problems. Countries with large current account deficits or worsening current account balances, for example, often exhibit cumulated losses in price competitiveness, and vice versa, which again, in turn may be related to price and cost developments that are not economically justified. Rather than financing productive investment in the tradable sector and fostering the export performance, capital inflows in deficit countries might fuel asset prices and household and corporate debt. Hence, even if inter-euro area current account balances do not matter because of the same currency and will not trigger exchange rate crises, at the euro area level, internal current account imbalances are relevant for policy-makers, as one of the major indicators of the fundamental functioning of their economies. Some observers are concerned that fiscal consolidation at the current juncture might dampen economic growth and also provide negative externalities by constraining demand for trading partners. I disagree with this view. [4] On the contrary, I see three main reasons for fiscal consolidation being presently positive for medium-term economic growth and competitiveness. First, experience from past episodes of fiscal consolidation suggests that, in a situation of sizeable fiscal imbalances, short-term costs of fiscal adjustment in terms of forgone economic growth tend to be contained or very limited, provided that consolidation is pursued as part of a comprehensive reform strategy. Experience also suggests that the success of a fiscal consolidation strategy strongly depends on its design. Adjustment on the spending side, accompanied by structural reforms to promote long-term growth, has typically been the best strategy, especially when combined with a credible long-term commitment to fiscal consolidation. Second, in a situation where fiscal sustainability is being questioned, consolidation boosts confidence, which is a pre-condition for the consolidation of the present recovery and for sustainable medium-term growth. Third, public authorities need to preserve the ultimate capacity of public finances to intervene in difficult circumstances. This is already true when our economies are going through the usual business cycle. The reconstitution of fiscal buffers is always necessary. It is even more necessary when our economies are coping with exceptional circumstances, such as the recovery from the deepest economic crisis in over 60 years. The soundness of public finances and the creditworthiness of the sovereign signatures are therefore a decisive component of economic and financial stability in a medium and long-term perspective. Let me now discuss what the implications of these insights are for the surveillance of economic policies in Europe, and in particular how the above five elements should be reflected best in the existing European framework of macroeconomic surveillance and in the envisaged new elements of this framework. Within an economic and monetary union, national economies form an interdependent system, in which spillovers are important for the cohesion of the union. It is not straightforward for countries to take account of these spillovers sufficiently on their own. This is the reason why strengthened surveillance at the euro area level is needed to prevent economies from falling behind by losing competitiveness and becoming subject to macroeconomic imbalances. I have already mentioned developments in prices, costs and wages, current account deficits and indicators of private and public sector indebtedness as well as countries’ external debt position. For many years, I have strongly advocated in various European fora that the accumulation of substantial losses of competitiveness, as revealed by developments in unit labour costs among other indicators was not sustainable. Therefore, I trust that this is where a surveillance framework aimed at preventing and correcting macroeconomic imbalances has to start.Of course, these elements are not the only ones we have to analyse carefully. As I have said before, economic reality is much more complex than just a pure set of indicators. Nevertheless such basic indicators are central for starting the analysis and for understanding the policy considerations. Let me therefore briefly sketch out the key indicators that ECB staff have been selecting after reviewing and assessing the relevance of a much wider set of variables. These indicators shall provide early warning signals when macroeconomic imbalances emerge and when countries are experiencing significant losses in competitiveness, or when there are risks thereof. The seven key indicators in the view of ECB staff are as follows: a long-term measure of the growth of unit labour costs; the stock of a country’s net external debt as a ratio to GDP; the national inflation rate; the current account deficit as a ratio to GDP; the private and government debt ratios;and the stock of private sector credit.These variables are all common economic indicators, they are easily available from official statistics and they are broad based. They have been selected to keep the first diagnosis as simple as possible, while still covering the most relevant dimensions of economic fitness. Such a scoreboard of indicators can help focus our attention on the key issues and trigger more detailed surveillance procedures in cases in which indicators rise beyond certain pre-defined threshold levels. The European Commission and the related Council working group have been working intensively on such a framework, including an alert mechanism on the basis of a limited set of macroeconomic indicators – similar to those I have just presented – which would initiate more detailed surveillance procedures. The current discussions are based on the Commission’s proposal for a new framework that will apply to all 27 EU Member States with a preventive and a corrective arm. Without going into all the technical details, let me make very clear once again which fundamental elements in its design should be improved. The ECB’s Governing Council, being responsible for ensuring price stability, has a major interest in the smooth functioning of the euro area economy. In this respect, the ECB considers it fundamental to set up an effective surveillance mechanism in the euro area that avoids the challenges that some countries are currently facing. The ECB published yesterday its opinion on the proposals made by the European Commission (ECB, 2011). It regards these proposals as appropriate for the Single Market, but considers that they need to be strengthened as regards the euro area. With respect to the new macroeconomic surveillance framework, the ECB calls, in particular, for the following specific measures to strengthen the framework for the euro area:First, the specific nature of membership of a monetary union should be indicated more explicitly. This should be reflected in differentiated indicators and thresholds of the scoreboard for the members of the euro area, in comparison with the other members of the European Union. Tighter thresholds for competitiveness indicators in the scoreboard are required for the euro area countries. The set of indicators for the euro area countries should focus on the detection of macroeconomic imbalances, and therefore they should refer to losses of price competitiveness, private and public sector indebtedness and external indebtedness indicators. They differ by nature from the much wider set of indicators reviewed to assess progress in structural reforms in the context of the Europe 2020 strategy to enhance sustainable growth and employment in Europe. These are the concepts that will address the “thriving of nations in the dynamic global economy” which I alluded to at the outset. Second, a clear focus of the surveillance framework can be maintained best if only cases of macroeconomic imbalances that hamper the smooth functioning of monetary union are addressed. The framework proposed by the European Commission is symmetric with respect to detecting, preventing and correcting both excessive losses as well as gains in competitiveness. I think that a totally symmetric approach misses an important point: the European Union and the euro area are not closed economies. On the contrary, they are amongst the most open economies in the world. Gaining more competitiveness through the improvements in one particular economy is a win-win game for all members: we are not playing a zero sum game. Therefore, a totally symmetric approach runs the risk that the surveillance lacks focus and becomes distracted from the most serious challenges to the monetary union, which are significant losses of competitiveness, persistent current account deficits, unsustainable increases in asset prices, including real estate prices, and high external and internal levels of indebtedness. Given the magnitude of the imbalances accumulated, the required policy action is urgent in some Member States.Third, a much greater degree of automatism should be introduced into the macroeconomic surveillance framework. A substantial discretionary power puts the credibility of the macroeconomic surveillance mechanism at risk, if the rules and enforcement measures are not consistently applied. Therefore, the possibility of derogation from the imposition of sanctions on the grounds of exceptional economic circumstances or at the request of a Member State should be avoided.Fourth, in the same vein as the reforms introduced in the Stability and Growth Pact, financial sanctions in the macroeconomic surveillance framework need to be applied at an earlier stage and gradually, to provide Member States with the right incentives to comply with the policy recommendations. This implies that financial incentives – such as an interest bearing deposit – should be applied after the first instance of non-compliance or non-cooperation by a Member State, while the current proposals foresee fines only after a repeated failure of a Member State to comply with Council recommendations.I am convinced that the European Parliament, with its co-decision power, will improve the framework very significantly and trust that the proposals above are helpful in this respect. Let me draw to a conclusion. Competitiveness improvements will enhance a country’s ability to achieve sustainable improvements in the economic living standards and job opportunities of its citizens. Europe’s 2020 strategy is fully part of the overall concept of competitiveness. It is, in a way, the “external” angle of competitiveness in the global economy. Today, I focused more on the “internal” angle of competitiveness, to strengthen the economic management of the Single Market and, more specifically, of the euro area. When the data are analysed within an appropriately comprehensive framework, several fallacies become evident. We know that we must look carefully at the non-tradable sector when assessing competitiveness. We must monitor compensation in the public sector very closely. We also understand – and this is absolutely fundamental – that a euro-wide price perspective must dominate over national computations when discounting nominal evolutions including revenues and wages. We see that the current account provides an important summary indicator. And finally, we trust that appropriate fiscal consolidation will lay the foundations for sustained competitiveness and durable employment of our economies. Figuratively speaking, competitiveness is not about becoming athletes in a world sprint competition. It is about staying fit and thriving for the long term. It is also about avoiding falling behind and ultimately becoming more dependent on others. Because the community benefits, competitiveness is not about becoming richer at the expense of others – the infamous beggar-thy-neighbour doctrine. Competitiveness is about individual and collective health, with the two of them being mutually reinforcing. We also need a commitment to sound and sustainable public finances and sound national economic policies. Both must be monitored by a rigorous, credible and focused surveillance framework.A rigorously implemented Europe 2020 strategy, coupled with a reinforcement of the governance framework before the European Parliament that we are calling for, will pave the way for prosperity, job creation and stability of the EU and the euro area in tomorrow’s global economy. The contribution of the single monetary policy to this process is clear. Monetary policy provides a reliable nominal anchor for households, enterprises, savers and investors that euro area-wide consumer prices will increase, as in the past 12 years, in line with the ECB’s definition of price stability over the medium term. Our 331 million fellow citizens can rest assured that the ECB is fully faithful to its primary mandate. By maintaining price stability over the medium term and by solidly anchoring inflation expectations at a level consistent with our definition of price stability, monetary policy can make the best contribution to the achievement of sustainable long-term economic growth and job creation.Thank you for your attention.Afonso, A. and P. Gomes (2008), “ Interactions between private and public sector wages”, ECB Working Paper no. 971, November.Bernard, A. B., Jensen, J. B., Redding, S. J. and P. K. Schott (2007), “Firms in international trade”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, 3, pp. 106-130.Deutsche Bundesbank (2010), “ The cyclical effects of concurrent fiscal consolidation with the euro area”, Monthly Report, July, pp. 30-31.Di Mauro, F. and K. Forster (2008), “ Globalisation and the competitiveness of the euro area”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 97, September.European Central Bank (2011), “ Opinion of the European Central Bank on economic governance reform in the European Union”, CON/2011/13, February 2011 ( Legal framework).Estrada, J. and M. de Molina (2009), “The Spanish economy in EMU: the first ten years”, Banco de España Occasional Paper 0901.Hofmann, B. and H. Remsperger (2005), “Inflation differentials among the euro area countries: potential causes and consequences”, conference paper presented at the ASSA annual meeting 2005.Holm-Hadulla, F., Kamath, K., Lamo, A., Pérez, J. J. and L. Schuknecht (2010), “ Public wages in the euro area – towards securing stability and competitiveness”, ECB Occasional Paper no. 112, June. Katsimi (2004), “ Inflation divergence in the euro area: the Balassa-Samuelson effect”, Applied Economics Letters, 11, pp. 329-332.Lamo, A., J. J. Pérez and L. Schuhknecht (2008), “ Public and private sector wages – co-movement and causality”, ECB Working Paper no. 963, November.Laubach, T. (2009), “New evidence on the interest rate impacts of budget deficits and debt”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 7 (4), pp. 858-885.Lommatzsch, K. and S. Tober (2006), “Euro area inflation: does the Balassa-Samuelson effect matter?”, International Economic Policy, pp. 105-136.Lopéz-Salido, D. J., Restoy, F. and J. Vallés (2005), “ Inflation differentials in EMU: the Spanish case”, Banco de Espana Working Paper 514.Melitz, M. and G. Ottaviano (2008), “Market size, trade and productivity”, Review of Economic Studies, 75, 295-316.Ottaviano, G., Taglioni, D. and F. di Mauro (2009), “The euro and the competitiveness of European firms”, Economic Policy, January, pp. 5-53.Pérez, J. J. and A. J. Sanchez (2010), “Is there a signalling role for public wages? Evidence for the euro area based on macro data”, ECB Working Paper No 1148. Forthcoming in Empirical Economics.Rabanal, P. (2009), “ Inflation differentials between Spain and EMU: a DSGE perspective”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 27, pp. 975-984.Rother, P., Schuhknecht, L. and J. Stark (2010), “The benefits of fiscal consolidation in unchartered waters”, ECB Occasional Paper Series no. 121, November.Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the ESCB (2005) “Competitiveness and the export performance of the euro area”, ECB Occasional Paper no. 30. Trichet, Jean-Claude (1992), “Dix ans de disinflation competitive”, Les notes bleues de Bercy, p. 1-12.Trichet, Jean-Claude (2010), “Stimulate no more – it is now time for all to tighten”, Financial Times, 22 July.Wagner, M. (2005), “The Balassa-Samuelson-effect in East and West, differences and similarities”, Reihe Ökonomie, no. 180, Institute for Advanced Studies, Wien.Zemanek, H., Belke, A. and G. Schnabl (2010), “Current account balances and structural adjustment in the euro area”, International Economic Policy, 7, pp. 83-127.[1]See Trichet (1992) for an analysis of the strategy of competitive disinflation in France at the time. [2]Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the ESCB, “Competitiveness and the export performance of the euro area”, Occasional Paper Series, No 30, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, 2005.[3]Unit labour costs are computed for the whole economy based on Eurostat data. Public sector wages refers to total compensation per government employee based on the OECD Economic Outlook database. The property prices are obtained from national sources as computed by the ECB. The coverage definition differs across countries. Household indebtedness is the sum of short and long-term loans to residents.[4]See also Trichet (2010). Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",understand concept competit mean particular euro area act upon question would like explor today question contempl life econom policymak question central futur nation economi europ particular import among constitut econom monetari union competit difficult idea nail decis common use depict differ thing secur export market share taxat corpor profit index wage invest hightech boost product growth view appropri definit competit countri abil achiev sustain improv econom live standard job opportun citizen open economi therefor competit entireti econom live time globalis obvious success term price cost competit one key condit enhanc live standard job creation open economi export natur import part pictur sector economi involv competit public good servic privat good servic tradabl good servic nontrad good servic financi servic firm firm activ part real economi household govern divers multifacet countri manifold mean achiev sustain longterm econom growth job creation object achiev sustain longterm growth open economi european global thrive nation within europ well within global economi undergo rapid structur chang european union world largest economi trade partner therefor appropri design strategi develop growth potenti tomorrow global economi strategi call europ focus three main area educ research innov resourc effici high employ social cohes element relev europ competit global economi ecb fulli support europ strategi today would like focus aspect competit intern europ econom monetari union e euro area union competit must examin nation level view take account particular high level interdepend economi creat singl currenc therefor competit rais econom live standard also strengthen cohes econom union therefor focus remark arrang competit surveil need euro area could enshrin current econom govern framework examin eu council european parliament econom monetari union essenc implement sound econom fiscal polici avoid larg sustain diverg treati devot entir chapter econom polici union particular focus countri adopt singl currenc econom monetari union member state must develop share common econom understand mutual surveil common understand implic member currenc union ensur structur featur economi help preserv relat competit posit open environ ensur collect stabil collect stabil oppos sustain larg imbal impli particular macroeconom polici need fulli consist stabilityori monetari polici emphasis way mean competit avoid intern imbal make everybodi look econom divers enjoy europ asset seek strengthen rather dissip matter howev divers lead larg persist diverg prevent diverg aris need common framework ensur member state within specif nation set stay commit regain necessari consolid preserv relat competit misguid nation econom polici lead emerg excess competit gap member currenc union primari symptom competit gap usual mount current account deficit signific accumul differ indic price cost competit lead particular inflat rate persist euro area common object develop also associ tension pain adjust process spillov member reason european central bank ecb regular provid analysi insight import competit econom monetari union inde five half year sinc ecb inject analysi relat competit european polici surveil around sign imbal diverg key nomin develop particular price cost wage start accumul signific govern council sent first analysi eurogroup focus price cost develop individu countri messag one diverg warrant interpret assess polici action time escb task forc set look deepli competit issu individu euro area countri ever sinc ecb provid updat analysi eurogroup inform unit labour cost product sector wage develop euro area countri becom recurr theme distribut meet sinc ecb undertaken regular comprehens competit review develop individu euro area countri ecb provid detail outlin govern council envisag competit framework euro area remark tonight would like focus main issu stake nation economi general member euro area particular begin remind stylis fact characteris econom develop euro area past year well fallaci competit encount year outlin key element framework analysi action competit subsequ discuss implic current propos strengthen macroeconom surveil euro area perspect let give stylis fact macroeconom develop euro area past decad provid data without go caus polici implic nomin unit labour cost grew cumul term euro area whole austria germani grew respect greec ireland grew respect public sector wage euro area grew close germani grew ireland greec grew rough percentag point privat sector wage residenti properti price euro area rose averag around per year greec rose averag year ireland rose year almost household indebted euro area averag rose gdp gdp increas period doubl economi highest increas illustr fact let turn fallaci hear sometim discuss similar fact discuss competit often reveal misconcept fallaci view wrong guid debat fallaci tradabl sector matter competit say problem competit economi compani export sector well price low profit good fallaci public wage develop affect economi competit say sinc public sector shelter intern competit develop public sector pay littl connect privat sector certain intern competit compani fallaci let discount wage cost develop relat high current domest inflat rate get benign pictur say wage increas fulli justifi product inflat moreov higher inflat rate pure catchingup phenomenon grow fast fallaci intraeuro area current account matter say current account balanc reflect intertempor optimis saver investor moreov current account deficit good reflect capit inflow attract higher return fallaci fiscal consolid harm competit say fiscal consolid go dampen effect growth weaken competit requir substanti govern expenditur point fallaci right strategi economi general euro area particular let share reflect five key element think correct diagnosi first nontrad sector essenti competit economi henc must look sector assess competit second wage develop public sector much import general realis therefor public sector must set compens level implic whole economi mind must awar role model third less close medium term name level mediumterm inflat ensur averag euro area ecb right benchmark use countri calcul competit indic real term henc one must misl temporari inflat differenti pricewag spiral would detriment employ fourth current account balanc import summari indic may signal loss competit emerg imbal result policymak monitor balanc close especi relat extern debt accumul final sound public financ precondit sustain competit yet reason fiscal solid let elabor element two main reason nontrad sector essenti economi competit first nontrad good nontrad servic import input product tradabl good henc rise price nontrad sector push cost tradabl sector second price unit labour cost increas nontrad sector ultim lead upward pressur unit labour cost tradabl sector lópezsalido et al secondround effect push product cost tradabl good reduc competit tradabl sector recent evid countri higher growth unit labour cost servic construct industri manufactur experienc worsen current account see exampl zemanek et al unit labour cost nontrad sector persist exceed tradabl sector firm export industri may see forc squeez profit margin unabl pass higher input price world price price cost pressur expand nontrad sector induc export reduc margin thus first export industri might bad export price remain unaffect industri gradual get squeez rather expand reduc relat weight export economi also overal growth potenti euro area govern wage bill account averag gdp total compens employe alreadi clear sheer size sector public wage increas import signal effect privat sector wage negoti larger public sector compar tradabl sector stronger signal wage privat sector therefor influenc unit labour cost privat sector take due account product develop henc larger public sector import challeng role overal evolut cost competit evid reveal import influenc public sector wage privat wage mani euro area countri public wage spillov seem particular import countri experienc high volatil public wage growth thus rapid increas unit labour cost sever loss intraeuro area competit come surpris countri pérez sanchez holmhadulla et al euro area averag annual inflat rate first year euro outcom line ecb definit price stabil close definit deepli entrench medium longterm inflat expect confirm ecb credibl public confid ecb abil deliv price stabil medium term ecb therefor provid nomin anchor futur price develop euro area whole currenc union natur phenomenon member state time differ inflat rate differ result differ econom develop level member state posit busi cycl depend trade henc global develop temporari deviat euro areawid inflat averag matter concern inde constitut import potenti adjust channel within currenc union exchang rate fix inflat differenti turn sourc concern becom larg persist signific period time persist areawid inflat rate member state regard economist justifi ground catchingup effect argument lowerincom countri usual import product gain tradabl sector turn lead higher economywid inflat due adjust nomin wage across sector balassasamuelson effect increas evid suggest effect overstress explan inflat differenti euro area case differenti driven healthi catchingup effect larg outcom inappropri macroeconom polici debtfinanc boom domest demand thus mediumterm inflat rate somewhat medium term appropri benchmark also nation level unit labour cost therefor develop compens taken due account labour product increas need consist order avoid rise unemploy moreov use contemporan lag inflat benchmark wage lead nomin persist spiral compens inflat averag euro area would lead progress loss cost competit higher unemploy central banker general index includ wage index particular singl currenc area record let first stress current account deficit like current account surplus necessarili point econom malfunct inde optim countri given macroeconom condit also true monetari union differ nation current account balanc normal featur capit flow exampl may favour member state better growth prospect higher expect return relat catchingup process success structur reform current account balanc may diverg across countri natur result respons asymmetr shock increas howev larger current account deficit combin signific loss competit high level privat public indebted overh nontrad sector may signal domest macroeconom imbal deeper structur problem countri larg current account deficit worsen current account balanc exampl often exhibit cumul loss price competit vice versa turn may relat price cost develop econom justifi rather financ product invest tradabl sector foster export perform capit inflow deficit countri might fuel asset price household corpor debt henc even intereuro area current account balanc matter currenc trigger exchang rate crise euro area level intern current account imbal relev policymak one major indic fundament function economi observ concern fiscal consolid current junctur might dampen econom growth also provid negat extern constrain demand trade partner disagre view contrari see three main reason fiscal consolid present posit mediumterm econom growth competit first experi past episod fiscal consolid suggest situat sizeabl fiscal imbal shortterm cost fiscal adjust term forgon econom growth tend contain limit provid consolid pursu part comprehens reform strategi experi also suggest success fiscal consolid strategi strong depend design adjust spend side accompani structur reform promot longterm growth typic best strategi especi combin credibl longterm commit fiscal consolid second situat fiscal sustain question consolid boost confid precondit consolid present recoveri sustain mediumterm growth third public author need preserv ultim capac public financ interven difficult circumst alreadi true economi go usual busi cycl reconstitut fiscal buffer alway necessari even necessari economi cope except circumst recoveri deepest econom crisi year sound public financ creditworthi sovereign signatur therefor decis compon econom financi stabil medium longterm perspect let discuss implic insight surveil econom polici europ particular five element reflect best exist european framework macroeconom surveil envisag new element framework within econom monetari union nation economi form interdepend system spillov import cohes union straightforward countri take account spillov suffici reason strengthen surveil euro area level need prevent economi fall behind lose competit becom subject macroeconom imbal alreadi mention develop price cost wage current account deficit indic privat public sector indebted well countri extern debt posit mani year strong advoc various european fora accumul substanti loss competit reveal develop unit labour cost among indic sustain therefor trust surveil framework aim prevent correct macroeconom imbal start cours element one analys care said econom realiti much complex pure set indic nevertheless basic indic central start analysi understand polici consider let therefor briefli sketch key indic ecb staff select review assess relev much wider set variabl indic shall provid earli warn signal macroeconom imbal emerg countri experienc signific loss competit risk thereof seven key indic view ecb staff follow longterm measur growth unit labour cost stock countri net extern debt ratio gdp nation inflat rate current account deficit ratio gdp privat govern debt ratio stock privat sector credit variabl common econom indic easili avail offici statist broad base select keep first diagnosi simpl possibl still cover relev dimens econom fit scoreboard indic help focus attent key issu trigger detail surveil procedur case indic rise beyond certain predefin threshold level european commiss relat council work group work intens framework includ alert mechan basi limit set macroeconom indic similar present would initi detail surveil procedur current discuss base commiss propos new framework appli eu member state prevent correct arm without go technic detail let make clear fundament element design improv ecb govern council respons ensur price stabil major interest smooth function euro area economi respect ecb consid fundament set effect surveil mechan euro area avoid challeng countri current face ecb publish yesterday opinion propos made european commiss ecb regard propos appropri singl market consid need strengthen regard euro area respect new macroeconom surveil framework ecb call particular follow specif measur strengthen framework euro area first specif natur membership monetari union indic explicit reflect differenti indic threshold scoreboard member euro area comparison member european union tighter threshold competit indic scoreboard requir euro area countri set indic euro area countri focus detect macroeconom imbal therefor refer loss price competit privat public sector indebted extern indebted indic differ natur much wider set indic review assess progress structur reform context europ strategi enhanc sustain growth employ europ concept address thrive nation dynam global economi allud outset second clear focus surveil framework maintain best case macroeconom imbal hamper smooth function monetari union address framework propos european commiss symmetr respect detect prevent correct excess loss well gain competit think total symmetr approach miss import point european union euro area close economi contrari amongst open economi world gain competit improv one particular economi winwin game member play zero sum game therefor total symmetr approach run risk surveil lack focus becom distract serious challeng monetari union signific loss competit persist current account deficit unsustain increas asset price includ real estat price high extern intern level indebted given magnitud imbal accumul requir polici action urgent member state third much greater degre automat introduc macroeconom surveil framework substanti discretionari power put credibl macroeconom surveil mechan risk rule enforc measur consist appli therefor possibl derog imposit sanction ground except econom circumst request member state avoid fourth vein reform introduc stabil growth pact financi sanction macroeconom surveil framework need appli earlier stage gradual provid member state right incent compli polici recommend impli financi incent interest bear deposit appli first instanc noncompli noncooper member state current propos forese fine repeat failur member state compli council recommend convinc european parliament codecis power improv framework signific trust propos help respect let draw conclus competit improv enhanc countri abil achiev sustain improv econom live standard job opportun citizen europ strategi fulli part overal concept competit way extern angl competit global economi today focus intern angl competit strengthen econom manag singl market specif euro area data analys within appropri comprehens framework sever fallaci becom evid know must look care nontrad sector assess competit must monitor compens public sector close also understand absolut fundament eurowid price perspect must domin nation comput discount nomin evolut includ revenu wage see current account provid import summari indic final trust appropri fiscal consolid lay foundat sustain competit durabl employ economi figur speak competit becom athlet world sprint competit stay fit thrive long term also avoid fall behind ultim becom depend other communiti benefit competit becom richer expens other infam beggarthyneighbour doctrin competit individu collect health two mutual reinforc also need commit sound sustain public financ sound nation econom polici must monitor rigor credibl focus surveil framework rigor implement europ strategi coupl reinforc govern framework european parliament call pave way prosper job creation stabil eu euro area tomorrow global economi contribut singl monetari polici process clear monetari polici provid reliabl nomin anchor household enterpris saver investor euro areawid consum price increas past year line ecb definit price stabil medium term million fellow citizen rest assur ecb fulli faith primari mandat maintain price stabil medium term solid anchor inflat expect level consist definit price stabil monetari polici make best contribut achiev sustain longterm econom growth job creation thank attent afonso p gome interact privat public sector wage ecb work paper novemb bernard b jensen j b red j p k schott firm intern trade journal econom perspect pp deutsch bundesbank cyclic effect concurr fiscal consolid euro area month report juli pp di mauro f k forster globalis competit euro area ecb occasion paper septemb european central bank opinion european central bank econom govern reform european union con februari legal framework estrada j m de molina spanish economi emu first ten year banco de españa occasion paper hofmann b h remsperg inflat differenti among euro area countri potenti caus consequ confer paper present assa annual meet holmhadulla f kamath k lamo pérez j j l schuknecht public wage euro area toward secur stabil competit ecb occasion paper june katsimi inflat diverg euro area balassasamuelson effect appli econom letter pp lamo j j pérez l schuhknecht public privat sector wage comov causal ecb work paper novemb laubach new evid interest rate impact budget deficit debt journal european econom associ pp lommatzsch k tober euro area inflat balassasamuelson effect matter intern econom polici pp lopézsalido d j restoy f j vallé inflat differenti emu spanish case banco de espana work paper melitz m g ottaviano market size trade product review econom studi ottaviano g taglioni d f di mauro euro competit european firm econom polici januari pp pérez j j j sanchez signal role public wage evid euro area base macro data ecb work paper forthcom empir econom raban p inflat differenti spain emu dsge perspect journal money credit bank pp rother p schuhknecht l j stark benefit fiscal consolid unchart water ecb occasion paper seri novemb task forc monetari polici committe escb competit export perform euro area ecb occasion paper trichet jeanclaud dix an de disinfl competit les note bleue de berci p trichet jeanclaud stimul time tighten financi time juli wagner m balassasamuelsoneffect east west differ similar reih ökonomi institut advanc studi wien zemanek h belk g schnabl current account balanc structur adjust euro area intern econom polici pp see trichet analysi strategi competit disinfl franc time task forc monetari polici committe escb competit export perform euro area occasion paper seri ecb frankfurt main unit labour cost comput whole economi base eurostat data public sector wage refer total compens per govern employe base oecd econom outlook databas properti price obtain nation sourc comput ecb coverag definit differ across countri household indebted sum short longterm loan resid see also trichet reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en