Jean-Claude Trichet: The external and internal dimensions of  Europe’s competitiveness,26-02-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,3744,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,These are very challenging times – for Ireland, for Europe and for the global economy. I am very pleased to be here in Dublin today. When, last year, the Institute of International and European Affairs kindly invited me to give a lecture on Europe’s competitiveness, I was delighted to accept the opportunity to look at Europe’s economy from a broad perspective and to focus particularly on the growing challenge of globalisation. As the title for my address today I have chosen “The external and internal dimensions of Europe’s competitiveness”, because it is my deep conviction that these two dimensions are closely related. And they are also related to the current situation, as we shall see. I will therefore also take the opportunity to talk about the economic crisis, its impact on Europe as a whole and on the Irish economy. Developments in the international economy were always likely to have a particular impact on this country, reflecting its very open nature and its strong dependence on international trade and financial flows. But it is important that we recognise the global nature of this crisis, in which public authorities everywhere are confronted by the adverse effects of the market turbulence on their own economies and financial systems. And it is important to recognise that despite these difficulties, we have not lost the things that have made our real economies so successful in recent years, notably our talented workforces, our dynamic businesses and our openness to trade.Let me start by focusing on the topic suggested to me by the hosts of today’s event. I would like to address some specific aspects of the external performance of the euro area and the euro area countries. And I would like to discuss how they relate to key internal dimensions including integration, flexibility and competition, drawing your attention to policy changes that are necessary to maintain and improve Europe’s competitiveness. As I will argue, those reforms will not only help the European economy to succeed in an increasingly globalised world: they are also crucial for getting through the current situation. So what do we mean by “competitiveness”? For many people, competitiveness is a disconcerting word, suggestive of pressures to change and constant adjustments. And as we know, these pressures can have personal and social costs. But there are very large benefits – we need to stay competitive for the long-term welfare of the people of the euro area.What does the word competitiveness mean to economists? In a narrow sense, it is often used to refer to international price competitiveness as measured by various indicators of effective exchange rates. At the European Central Bank we analyse developments according to a whole host of such indicators. This concept of competitiveness is linked to the “external performance” of a country, typically measured in terms of export growth, shares of export markets or current account balances. Developments in price competitiveness have always been important drivers of an economy’s ability to compete in international markets. But in recent years, other factors have become increasingly important in the face of the structural changes engendered by globalisation. These relate to export specialisation, which includes the range and the quality of the products a country exports, and the particular markets it exports to. In this regard, it is important that our countries take advantage of their high technological advancement and well-educated labour forces, to produce higher quality and more sophisticated goods and to redirect their exports towards strongly growing markets. Looking even more closely into the domestic structure of an economy we come to the notion of productivity. Productivity and competitiveness are two different concepts, but there are close links between them. “Competitiveness”, when more broadly defined, includes a notion of relative productivity. Under this definition, the most competitive economy is the one with the best prospects for “generating” highly productive firms, contributing to longer-term economic growth and, ultimately, to the welfare of its citizens. Recent advances in trade theory have stressed the connections between the external and internal dimensions of competitiveness, which have become increasingly relevant in a globalising economy. Some of the latest economic models of trade [1] see global competition as a selection mechanism, in which only the most productive firms do business outside their national borders. [2] Less productive firms, by contrast, which are unable to bear the transport and other costs related to foreign trade, are either forced out of business or remain confined to their domestic market. Countries in which highly productive firms can thrive are therefore also likely to do better in terms of their overall export performance, as this will allow more firms to compete successfully in international markets. In general, these are countries with more intense domestic market competition, better technology and greater openness to foreign competitors. [3]These new models also stress the importance of countries’ institutional framework which may make market access easier and push domestic firms to innovate. According to this body of economic knowledge, continuing efforts to promote stronger competition and further market integration within Europe appear to be important tools for supporting and enhancing the global competitiveness of European firms. Applying these concepts to Europe, how do we assess our external competitiveness; how are European firms performing in globalised markets? Globalisation has given a boost to world trade. Over the past two decades world trade has grown one and a half times faster than world output, and the difference has even considerably higher in recent years as world trade growth accelerated very strongly. Transport costs have dropped dramatically, as have tariffs, and the surge in information and communication technology has facilitated a global exchange of goods and services as well as globalised supply chains. More and more goods and services have become tradable, and domestic companies have increasingly engaged in international trade. The euro area has actively contributed to the rise in international trade. Our continent has a long history in trading, but the openness of the euro area has increased that business markedly. In the mid-1990s, exports of goods and services from the euro area were equivalent to around 30% [4] of GDP; now they are equivalent to around 44% of GDP. Earlier observers who said that European integration could lead to a closing vis-à-vis the outside world have proved to be utterly wrong: quite the opposite has happened. Of course, Europe’s trade has grown not only because of Asia’s, and particularly China’s emergence as a fully-fledged trading partner, but also by the growing role of the central and eastern European countries. But even though we are roughly comparable in size to the United States, the euro area is about ten percentage points more open, and we are much more open than Japan, despite our larger size. This is an indication of why Europe has a key stake in global economic developments. Europe’s openness is also remarkable in international finance: over the past decade, the stock of outward and inward foreign direct investment has virtually doubled as a percentage of GDP. And even more strikingly, the euro area is more open financially than other advanced countries, like the United States and Japan. In 2007, international financial assets and liabilities of the euro area, as a percentage of GDP, reached almost 160%, compared with about 135% for the United States and 90% for Japan. And this explains why Europe is largely exposed to the current global financial crisis and it underscores to which extent Europe has an important stake in global financial stability. Greater openness in trade and finance has of course created new challenges, which have rarely been as visible as today. And just as with the global financial crisis, global trade integration calls for constant adjustment. As low-cost competitors have emerged, the euro area – just like other advanced economies – has recorded some losses in world export market shares. These losses partly reflect the mechanical effect of the increasing shares of the new entrants, but the challenge for advanced economies remains: to adjust their export portfolios according to their technological comparative advantages, towards higher quality products, and towards products that are more skill-intensive and capital-intensive. So what is the comparative advantage of the euro area in the global economy? Recent ECB analysis [5] has looked at so-called Balassa indices of revealed comparative advantage. According to these indices, a country specialises in a specific product or sector, if the share of that product or sector in the country's exports is higher than the share of that product or sector in world exports. This analysis suggests, somewhat surprisingly, and in contrast to other advanced economies, that the euro area specialisation overall has not changed much over last one and a half decades. There has been neither a decline in the specialisation in labour-intensive products, nor the expected shift towards more research-intensive production. This might reflect structural rigidities that constrain the ability of euro area firms to adjust rapidly, but it could also mean that euro area firms have so far not been under significant pressure to make substantial changes in their specialisation - particularly in medium-high-tech exports. But this general picture for the euro area does however not necessarily hold for all euro area countries. Overall, there have been substantial differences in the export performance across individual countries. And euro area countries have witnessed significant differences in cost competitiveness since the launch of the euro. This explains why the ECB has always said that an appropriate peer surveillance of the evolution of competitiveness indicators, including cost competitiveness and unit labour costs was of the essence. [6]This brings me naturally to the second part of my talk, the internal dimension of European competitiveness. Understanding the causes of growing labour cost differentials or the cumulative increases in labour costs across euro area countries is very important for improving the adjustment process of countries within Economic and Monetary Union. From an economist’s perspective, increases in unit labour costs stem from higher compensation per employee or lower productivity, or a combination of the two. In the case of the euro area, the main source of difference in recent years has been differences in the growth rates of compensation per employee, rather than differences in productivity growth. Let’s look at the reasons behind these differences and the options that countries have to improve their situation. Such analysis is particular important at this time. Some countries may not only be affected by the global downturn and the financial crisis; they may also need to adjust in order to undo domestic imbalances.I see four main developments which have arisen in the Monetary Union and which help to explain the observed differences in increases in labour costs in a number of euro area countries. First, some countries might have entered the euro area at a moment where this overall cost competitiveness was clearly hampered for a number of reasons. Germany offers a clear example of such an economy due to the strong increases of unit labour costs associated with the reunification. A lower level of increases in unit labour cost than the average of the euro area was advisable for such economies.Second, the opposite case has also been observed. Some countries have entered the euro area in a position of relative ‘over- competitiveness’. The Netherlands for instance had in 1999 a very strong competitive position due to the success of their longstanding previous strategy of competitive disinflation. A higher level of increases of unit labour cost during several years is explainable in such a situation.Third, some countries might be or might have been catching up in terms of growth. Then they may have experienced relatively strong trend increases in per capita GDP. To the extent that these income per capita developments are sustainable, relatively strong wage increases are justifiable by reference to the fundamentals of the economy. These three first developments are economically justified and need not be a concern to policy makers.However, there is a fourth type of developments which poses problems for the economies concerned. Some euro area countries have witnessed a long period of strong growth in domestic demand. These demand pressures were related to expectations of consumers or firms about future income and profit prospects, which, it is now clear, were overly optimistic. [7] This situation was often accompanied or intensified by an insufficiently tight fiscal stance, even if headline fiscal numbers (such as the deficit and the debt ratio) still suggested a healthy fiscal situation. Technically speaking, governments and the public have mistakenly taken a cyclical or temporary expansion to be an upward shift in potential output and long-term income growth. They thus took insufficient account of the impact of a possible downturn in activity on the public finances and private income. In simpler terms, this means nothing less than extrapolating the good times almost for ever and accordingly increasing spending and indebtedness. In our economic models, we often speak about “forward-looking agents”, portraying households, firms and governments as making rational economic calculations with a watchful eye on the future. But in reality, we have to be aware of too many “forward-spending” agents, private and public alike. Such a situation can stoke inflation and bring cumulated losses in competitiveness, lower export performance and a high current account deficit. Moreover, it has often resulted not only in pressures on the prices of goods and services, but also in asset price inflation, notably in the housing market.In addition, in some cases sizeable wage increases in the public sector during normal or good times may have provided the wrong signals for wage bargaining in other sectors. The accumulation of relative losses in competitiveness and the build-up of domestic imbalances need, at some point, to be corrected. The correction within a monetary union can and must be achieved through lower unit labour costs increases relative to the average of the Union. In an environment of flexible wages and prices, this adjustment could proceed smoothly without significant losses in output and employment. However if the economy concerned suffers from structural rigidities in product and labour markets, a more protracted and more painful adjustment in output and employment will then finally take place. [8] As enhancing flexibility has been a message that the ECB has championed for a long time, let me focus on such rigidities, which unfortunately appear to affect most countries. I believe there should be more public awareness that insufficient attention of wage setting to current and expected productivity developments makes any correction to previous losses of competitiveness more painful in terms of output and employment losses. Let me now turn to the current difficulties in the international economy, which are having such a strongly negative impact on the Irish economy. For many years, Ireland has been a great success story: openness to trade and a high degree of flexibility have allowed the country to benefit substantially from globalisation during the last decades. It now has a very high income per capita, and it is characterised by a skilled workforce, a flexible labour market, moderate taxation and a business-friendly regulatory environment. None of these advantages have been lost as a result of the global financial crisis. But crucially for Ireland, this unprecedented international shock has come at the same time as the economy has been undergoing a necessary rebalancing in the composition of its growth, intensifying the challenges it faces. In particular the construction and the banking sectors need to adjust.The Irish government is acting resolutely to address the situation. With the public finances, important action is being taken to make immediate savings, and plans are being drawn up for a return to compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact. A fiscal policy that convincingly reduces future public deficits is indeed absolutely essential. In addition, measures have been taken or are under way to recover lost competitiveness and to exploit the country’s comparative advantages in its high-tech, high-skills industries.What is crucial at this moment for all economic policy actors, is to take measures that are both supportive in the current environment and in the longer-term interests of the economy. Many euro area countries, despite some progress, still exhibit structural impediments triggered by a rigid legal and regulatory environment. Unemployment is a clear concern right now in many parts of the euro area, and we surely do not want to lose human capital or scar a large proportion of the people of working age. As I mentioned before wage restraint would help a lot in this respect. More generally, in order to minimise job and output losses related to the current downturn, it is vital that euro area governments and social partners pursue four objectives: First, wage setting needs to take account of the competitiveness and labour market conditions in a responsible and timely manner. [9] Second, national authorities should pursue courageous policies of spending restraint especially in the case of public wages. A prudent fiscal stance should be always in place. Third, the completion of the Single Market, particularly in services and network industries, should be achieved. A deeper integration of markets is crucial to foster competition and open product and labour markets. Measures that hinder free competition and cross-border trade must be avoided. In this context, it is of the utmost importance to resist protectionist measures. Fourth, in the context of the Lisbon agenda, the necessary reforms that enhance competition and improve long-term growth prospects in the euro area must be implemented. Especially in these difficult times such reforms are very important in all euro area countries to counteract the economic downturn and limit its negative impact on employment. The price of delaying reforms is particularly high at the current stage. For many years, we have been saying that we need structural reforms – more openness, more competition. The crisis offers us the opportunity and the obligation to seize the moment and implement the right reforms. These would help the economy overcome the crisis and be stronger afterwards.I also want to call on European policy makers as a whole. As a lesson from the current crisis, we should consider ways how to strengthen our surveillance of competitiveness within the European Union, and in particular the euro area. This should help countries to build stronger buffers in good times. And it should also help to avoid excessive increases in unit labour costs. In other words, this would prevent us from again extending public and private spending beyond sustainable levels and experiencing difficulties similar to the current ones.Let me draw to a close. As you know, the great Irish playwright George Bernard Shaw was not at all impressed by the economics profession. His was the famous disparaging remark that 'if all economists were laid end to end, they would not reach a conclusion'. Certainly in these very challenging times, it is not easy for all economic policy-makers to reach agreement on the way forward. But let me offer some conclusions on which I hope we can all agree. The euro area is resolutely addressing the challenges of the global financial turbulence, the global imbalances and the resulting global slowdown. Looking forward, we need to continue with our efforts to make the euro area stronger, more flexible, more resilient and more prosperous. The ECB’s Governing Council, of which Governor Hurley has been a member for many years, is tirelessly working to make the euro area better off. I am also optimistic about the prospects for this country. The Irish economy clearly faces severe challenges over the next few years – and hard decisions will have to be taken. But in many ways, the Irish economy is an excellent example of some of the characteristics that foster global competitiveness – in its openness, its flexibility and its high levels of education. And this has paid off in significant increases in income per capita.Some things will of course have to change. But none of the positive characteristics are lost nor should they be lost in the crisis. In my view, the open nature of this economy with its associated flexibility and adaptability means that Ireland will be well placed to benefit greatly from the eventual recovery and to compete effectively in the global economy in the future. Baumann, U. and F. di Mauro (2007), “Globalisation and euro area trade – interactions and challenges”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 55, March.Bernard, A.B., Jensen, J.B., Redding, S.J. and P.K. Schott (2007), „Firms in international trade“, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, 3, pp. 106-130.Blanchard O. (2007), “Current account deficits in rich countries”, NBER working paper no. 12925. Campa J.M. and A. Gavilán (2006), “Current account in the euro area: an intertemporal approach”, Documento de trabajo del Banco de Espana, no. 0638.di Mauro, F. and K. Forster (2008), “Globalisation and the competitiveness of the euro area”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 97, September.DuCaju P., Gautier, E., Momferatou, D. and M. Ward-Warmendiger (2008), “Institutional features of wage bargaining in 22 EU countries, the US and Japan”, ECB Working Paper no. 974, December.ECB (2008), “Monitoring Labour cost developments across euro area countries”, Monthly Bulletin, November, pp. 69-85.European Commission (2006), “The EU economy: 2006 review. Adjustment dynamics in the euro area – Experiences and Challenges”, European Economy n.6.Melitz, M. and G. Ottaviano (2008), “Market size, trade and productivity”, Review of Economic Studies, 75, pp. 295-316.Ottaviano, G., D. Taglioni and F. di Mauro (2009), “The euro and the competitiveness of European firms”, Economic Policy, pp. 5-53, January.[1] For an overview, see, for instance, Bernard et al (2007). [2] More particularly, once countries become more exposed to trade, higher foreign competition will have two impacts: On the one hand, this will lead to shrinking operating profits of domestic firms in domestic markets, which will force the least productive firms to exit the market. On the other hand, for those firms that are productive enough to cope with the additional costs of foreign activity (i.e. transport costs or costs related to administrative duties or institutional and cultural barriers), the opening of distant markets also provides additional opportunities to enlarge their market shares and to get additional profits from foreign venues.[3] See, for example, Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) and Ottaviano, Taglioni and di Mauro (2009).[4] Source: ECB calculations based on IMF World Economic Outlook.[5] For more details, see di Mauro and Forster (2008), providing an update of the earlier analysis by Baumann and di Mauro (2007).[6] See also ECB (2008) , Monitoring labour cost developments across euro area countries, Monthly Bulletin, November 2008, pages 69-85.[7] See Campa and Gavilán (2006) and Blanchard (2007)  [8] See European Commission (2006).[9] For a review of wage arrangements across euro area countries, see DuCaju et al. (2008).Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen challeng time ireland europ global economi pleas dublin today last year institut intern european affair kind invit give lectur europ competit delight accept opportun look europ economi broad perspect focus particular grow challeng globalis titl address today chosen extern intern dimens europ competit deep convict two dimens close relat also relat current situat shall see therefor also take opportun talk econom crisi impact europ whole irish economi develop intern economi alway like particular impact countri reflect open natur strong depend intern trade financi flow import recognis global natur crisi public author everywher confront advers effect market turbul economi financi system import recognis despit difficulti lost thing made real economi success recent year notabl talent workforc dynam busi open trade let start focus topic suggest host today event would like address specif aspect extern perform euro area euro area countri would like discuss relat key intern dimens includ integr flexibl competit draw attent polici chang necessari maintain improv europ competit argu reform help european economi succeed increas globalis world also crucial get current situat mean competit mani peopl competit disconcert word suggest pressur chang constant adjust know pressur person social cost larg benefit need stay competit longterm welfar peopl euro area word competit mean economist narrow sens often use refer intern price competit measur various indic effect exchang rate european central bank analys develop accord whole host indic concept competit link extern perform countri typic measur term export growth share export market current account balanc develop price competit alway import driver economi abil compet intern market recent year factor becom increas import face structur chang engend globalis relat export specialis includ rang qualiti product countri export particular market export regard import countri take advantag high technolog advanc welleduc labour forc produc higher qualiti sophist good redirect export toward strong grow market look even close domest structur economi come notion product product competit two differ concept close link competit broad defin includ notion relat product definit competit economi one best prospect generat high product firm contribut longerterm econom growth ultim welfar citizen recent advanc trade theori stress connect extern intern dimens competit becom increas relev globalis economi latest econom model trade see global competit select mechan product firm busi outsid nation border less product firm contrast unabl bear transport cost relat foreign trade either forc busi remain confin domest market countri high product firm thrive therefor also like better term overal export perform allow firm compet success intern market general countri intens domest market competit better technolog greater open foreign competitor new model also stress import countri institut framework may make market access easier push domest firm innov accord bodi econom knowledg continu effort promot stronger competit market integr within europ appear import tool support enhanc global competit european firm appli concept europ assess extern competit european firm perform globalis market globalis given boost world trade past two decad world trade grown one half time faster world output differ even consider higher recent year world trade growth acceler strong transport cost drop dramat tariff surg inform communic technolog facilit global exchang good servic well globalis suppli chain good servic becom tradabl domest compani increas engag intern trade euro area activ contribut rise intern trade contin long histori trade open euro area increas busi mark mid export good servic euro area equival around gdp equival around gdp earlier observ said european integr could lead close visàvi outsid world prove utter wrong quit opposit happen cours europ trade grown asia particular china emerg fullyfledg trade partner also grow role central eastern european countri even though rough compar size unit state euro area ten percentag point open much open japan despit larger size indic europ key stake global econom develop europ open also remark intern financ past decad stock outward inward foreign direct invest virtual doubl percentag gdp even strike euro area open financi advanc countri like unit state japan intern financi asset liabil euro area percentag gdp reach almost compar unit state japan explain europ larg expos current global financi crisi underscor extent europ import stake global financi stabil greater open trade financ cours creat new challeng rare visibl today global financi crisi global trade integr call constant adjust lowcost competitor emerg euro area like advanc economi record loss world export market share loss part reflect mechan effect increas share new entrant challeng advanc economi remain adjust export portfolio accord technolog compar advantag toward higher qualiti product toward product skillintens capitalintens compar advantag euro area global economi recent ecb analysi look socal balassa indic reveal compar advantag accord indic countri specialis specif product sector share product sector countri export higher share product sector world export analysi suggest somewhat surpris contrast advanc economi euro area specialis overal chang much last one half decad neither declin specialis labourintens product expect shift toward researchintens product might reflect structur rigid constrain abil euro area firm adjust rapid could also mean euro area firm far signific pressur make substanti chang specialis particular mediumhightech export general pictur euro area howev necessarili hold euro area countri overal substanti differ export perform across individu countri euro area countri wit signific differ cost competit sinc launch euro explain ecb alway said appropri peer surveil evolut competit indic includ cost competit unit labour cost essenc bring natur second part talk intern dimens european competit understand caus grow labour cost differenti cumul increas labour cost across euro area countri import improv adjust process countri within econom monetari union economist perspect increas unit labour cost stem higher compens per employe lower product combin two case euro area main sourc differ recent year differ growth rate compens per employe rather differ product growth let look reason behind differ option countri improv situat analysi particular import time countri may affect global downturn financi crisi may also need adjust order undo domest imbal see four main develop arisen monetari union help explain observ differ increas labour cost number euro area countri first countri might enter euro area moment overal cost competit clear hamper number reason germani offer clear exampl economi due strong increas unit labour cost associ reunif lower level increas unit labour cost averag euro area advis economi second opposit case also observ countri enter euro area posit relat competit netherland instanc strong competit posit due success longstand previous strategi competit disinfl higher level increas unit labour cost sever year explain situat third countri might might catch term growth may experienc relat strong trend increas per capita gdp extent incom per capita develop sustain relat strong wage increas justifi refer fundament economi three first develop econom justifi need concern polici maker howev fourth type develop pose problem economi concern euro area countri wit long period strong growth domest demand demand pressur relat expect consum firm futur incom profit prospect clear over optimist situat often accompani intensifi insuffici tight fiscal stanc even headlin fiscal number deficit debt ratio still suggest healthi fiscal situat technic speak govern public mistaken taken cyclic temporari expans upward shift potenti output longterm incom growth thus took insuffici account impact possibl downturn activ public financ privat incom simpler term mean noth less extrapol good time almost ever accord increas spend indebted econom model often speak forwardlook agent portray household firm govern make ration econom calcul watch eye futur realiti awar mani forwardspend agent privat public alik situat stoke inflat bring cumul loss competit lower export perform high current account deficit moreov often result pressur price good servic also asset price inflat notabl hous market addit case sizeabl wage increas public sector normal good time may provid wrong signal wage bargain sector accumul relat loss competit buildup domest imbal need point correct correct within monetari union must achiev lower unit labour cost increas relat averag union environ flexibl wage price adjust could proceed smooth without signific loss output employ howev economi concern suffer structur rigid product labour market protract pain adjust output employ final take place enhanc flexibl messag ecb champion long time let focus rigid unfortun appear affect countri believ public awar insuffici attent wage set current expect product develop make correct previous loss competit pain term output employ loss let turn current difficulti intern economi strong negat impact irish economi mani year ireland great success stori open trade high degre flexibl allow countri benefit substanti globalis last decad high incom per capita characteris skill workforc flexibl labour market moder taxat businessfriend regulatori environ none advantag lost result global financi crisi crucial ireland unpreced intern shock come time economi undergo necessari rebalanc composit growth intensifi challeng face particular construct bank sector need adjust irish govern act resolut address situat public financ import action taken make immedi save plan drawn return complianc stabil growth pact fiscal polici convinc reduc futur public deficit inde absolut essenti addit measur taken way recov lost competit exploit countri compar advantag hightech highskil industri crucial moment econom polici actor take measur support current environ longerterm interest economi mani euro area countri despit progress still exhibit structur impedi trigger rigid legal regulatori environ unemploy clear concern right mani part euro area sure want lose human capit scar larg proport peopl work age mention wage restraint would help lot respect general order minimis job output loss relat current downturn vital euro area govern social partner pursu four object first wage set need take account competit labour market condit respons time manner second nation author pursu courag polici spend restraint especi case public wage prudent fiscal stanc alway place third complet singl market particular servic network industri achiev deeper integr market crucial foster competit open product labour market measur hinder free competit crossbord trade must avoid context utmost import resist protectionist measur fourth context lisbon agenda necessari reform enhanc competit improv longterm growth prospect euro area must implement especi difficult time reform import euro area countri counteract econom downturn limit negat impact employ price delay reform particular high current stage mani year say need structur reform open competit crisi offer us opportun oblig seiz moment implement right reform would help economi overcom crisi stronger afterward also want call european polici maker whole lesson current crisi consid way strengthen surveil competit within european union particular euro area help countri build stronger buffer good time also help avoid excess increas unit labour cost word would prevent us extend public privat spend beyond sustain level experienc difficulti similar current one let draw close know great irish playwright georg bernard shaw impress econom profess famous disparag remark economist laid end end would reach conclus certain challeng time easi econom policymak reach agreement way forward let offer conclus hope agre euro area resolut address challeng global financi turbul global imbal result global slowdown look forward need continu effort make euro area stronger flexibl resili prosper ecb govern council governor hurley member mani year tireless work make euro area better also optimist prospect countri irish economi clear face sever challeng next year hard decis taken mani way irish economi excel exampl characterist foster global competit open flexibl high level educ paid signific increas incom per capita thing cours chang none posit characterist lost lost crisi view open natur economi associ flexibl adapt mean ireland well place benefit great eventu recoveri compet effect global economi futur baumann u f di mauro globalis euro area trade interact challeng ecb occasion paper march bernard b jensen j b red j p k schott firm intern trade journal econom perspect pp blanchard o current account deficit rich countri nber work paper campa j m gavilán current account euro area intertempor approach documento de trabajo del banco de espana di mauro f k forster globalis competit euro area ecb occasion paper septemb ducaju p gautier e momferatou d m wardwarmendig institut featur wage bargain eu countri us japan ecb work paper decemb ecb monitor labour cost develop across euro area countri month bulletin novemb pp european commiss eu economi review adjust dynam euro area experi challeng european economi n melitz m g ottaviano market size trade product review econom studi pp ottaviano g d taglioni f di mauro euro competit european firm econom polici pp januari overview see instanc bernard et al particular countri becom expos trade higher foreign competit two impact one hand lead shrink oper profit domest firm domest market forc least product firm exit market hand firm product enough cope addit cost foreign activ e transport cost cost relat administr duti institut cultur barrier open distant market also provid addit opportun enlarg market share get addit profit foreign venu see exampl melitz ottaviano ottaviano taglioni di mauro sourc ecb calcul base imf world econom outlook detail see di mauro forster provid updat earlier analysi baumann di mauro see also ecb monitor labour cost develop across euro area countri month bulletin novemb page see campa gavilán blanchard see european commiss review wage arrang across euro area countri see ducaju et al reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en