Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Financial Integration and Stability:  Efficiency Gains vs. Pitfalls,11-06-2010,European Central Bank,ECB,2406,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen [1],It is a pleasure for me to speak at this conference today here in Warsaw. Heterogeneous nations and globalized financial markets – the title of this conference – are an old phenomenon. In fact, in the late medieval ages of the 14th to the 16th century, the Kingdom of Poland, the Holy Roman Empire and the Hanseatic area have formed a well financially integrated area contributing to more specialization in trade and hence to economic growth at that time. In fact, despite the existence of many currencies, money was easy to transport and so financial integration was rather more advanced than the integration of markets for goods. The Kingdom of Poland was playing a particular role for the financial integration at that time as a key provider of silver from its silver mines for the coin production, also for the neighbouring regions. [2] In today’s modern economies, we think of financial integration having mainly two positive impacts. First, to improve the allocative efficiency of capital, and second, to help the diversification of risks.The mission statement of the Eurosystem very well reflects this by stating that, beyond the overriding objective of maintaining price stability, “ we aim to safeguard financial stability and promote European financial integration.” In the light of the recent events, the benefits of financial integration are sometimes put into question and it may look like that the two objectives – safeguarding financial stability and promoting financial integration – potentially conflict with each other. It is exactly because we live in an increasingly interconnected world that the crisis has been so severe and widespread.So why should we – after the recent crisis – still promote financial integration? And still believe in the reconcilability of financial integration and financial stability?I will argue that financial integration is not only a fact, it is absolutely necessary for the functioning of the euro area economy. It is an irreversible process which should be promoted. While it may be true that financial integration poses some risks to financial stability – such as contagion fostered by greater interconnectedness – the benefits stemming from financial integration far outweigh its costs. I will try to convince you that – instead of containing financial integration - our efforts need to be directed at a better understanding of the different forms of financial development, particularly related to two aspects, namely complexity and size. Opaque products, when difficult to understand, may lead to mispricing of risks and distorted allocation of resources. With respect to size, an overly large financial system could have negative effects on the functioning of the economy, either because it drains too many resources from other sectors, or because it increases the risks of bubbles. I will conclude with a few considerations on how the establishment of the European Systemic Risk Board can contribute to enhance the stability of our financial system.In my view, three elements constitute an integrated financial market: (i) a single set of rules, (ii) equal access to financial instruments or services, and (iii) equal treatment in operating in the market. If these conditions are satisfied, any price difference between assets with identical risk-return characteristics will be immediately arbitraged away.This definition stems from the intuition that lack of integration reflects the existence of barriers to cross-border activities. One can think of three main categories of obstacles to financial integration: cultural, legal and technical. Recent academic research has shown that there are non-negligible psychological and cultural barriers to financial integration. While further cultural integration may take time, the integration policies of the European Union (EU) had the explicit aim of removing legal barriers and building the necessary technical infrastructure. Indeed, the recent economic history of the EU has been marked by distinctive efforts aimed at the removal of barriers to cross-border activities. The EU Banking Directives (1977, 1988), the Financial Services Action Plan (1999), the White Paper (2005) are all examples of EU initiatives aimed at creating a true level playing field in the financial sector.Financial integration is essential for the functioning of the euro area as it is for other economies and regions. The financial system represents the primary channel through which monetary policy affects the economy. A stable, efficient and integrated financial market is the basis for smooth transmission of monetary policy in which monetary policy decisions are transmitted equally across member countries. The Eurosystem has taken since the launch of the euro a proactive stance to promote financial integration in the single currency area. For instance, the establishment of an integrated European payments infrastructure – through the creation of the Eurosystem large-value payment system TARGET and its successor TARGET 2 – has been instrumental for the integration of the money market. The integration of the money market has been of particular help in the recent crisis for the ECB to react promptly and successfully. It has proven to be beneficial in effectively providing liquidity to the market, and thereby ensuring a proper and smooth transmission of monetary policy. Therefore, to improve financial stability by a lower degree of financial integration would certainly be the wrong measure. We should not undo those reforms which have paved the way to financial integration and revert back to a retrenchment within the national borders. This is certainly not the right strategy for the euro area, and it would be undesirable at global level. Admittedly, financial integration generates greater interconnectedness, which in turn may increase the risk that failure in one part of the system may trigger chain reactions in the formation of expectations which could have a destabilizing effect. But financial isolation – the opposite of financial integration – is not the rational answer to such a risk. We nowadays live in a global world, where not only financial, but also economic and cultural links have become increasingly tighter. News spread instantaneously and shape global market sentiments; products are designed, assembled and sold in different countries; political events in a small region can send shockwaves around the world. It would be naïve to think that a country could isolate itself financially. And even if it were possible, the costs in terms of lost efficiency and productivity would far outweigh any possible benefit.If financial integration is both an irreversible process and a process we do not wish to reverse, finance per se is not always good in any form and size. This is where we can and should have a reasonable and fruitful discussion. Financial development refers to the process of financial innovation and organisational improvements that reduces asymmetric information, increases the completeness of the markets, and reduces transaction costs.When these conditions are satisfied, finance can promote economic growth and serve best the society at large. Indeed, a well developed financial system serves the primary functions of screening and monitoring investment projects, allowing the diversification of risks, facilitating the process of price discovery, and providing the service of liquidity transformation by matching short-term savers with long-term borrowers. Overall, finance helps lifting financial constraints for firms, allowing the realisation of projects with positive net present value, which would have otherwise not been implemented. There are however some forms of financial innovation which may generate perverse incentives, reduce transparency, and overall weaken the stability of the financial system. Let me take securitisation as an example. When correctly implemented, securitisation allows risk to be transferred from the originators of the loans to financial investors willing to hold that risk. This in turn generates a more efficient allocation of risks. The recent financial crisis has, however, highlighted severe weaknesses of such a scheme, related to misaligned incentives, lack of transparency and poor risk management. This form of intermediation has introduced several layers of management between the investor and the investment. Managers had the incentive to place in the market as many instruments as possible, as their compensations were mainly coming from collection of fees. Investors, on the other hand, were attracted by the relatively higher return in times of low investment rate levels and by the sense of security provided – among other things – by the assessment of rating agencies. The ultimate outcome was that instead of dispersing risks associated with bank lending, securitisation had the opposite effect of concentrating them in the banking system, with harmful consequences for financial stability. The size of the financial sector is another aspect which deserves close scrutiny. When the financial system grows too large it may eventually lead to a misallocation of resources. Of course, it has to be acknowledged that developed credit markets are important for business start-ups. However, while finance is a crucial element for the Schumpeterian process of creative destruction, the recent financial crisis has also highlighted the role that large financial markets play in downside risk. A growing number of academics and opinion makers are questioning the theory that the effect of financial markets on growth is always positive and increasing. The relationship may well be non-linear: when of reasonable size, financial markets do help allocating resources efficiently and promote economic growth. However, as they grow larger, it may well be that financial markets may exert a decreasing marginal contribution to growth. In extreme cases, as the size of financial systems exceeds some threshold, their effect on growth could even turn negative. In fact, when the financial system grows out of proportion with respect to economic fundamentals, this may go hand in hand with the creation of exceedingly complex financial products, herding behaviour, materialization of tail risks and it may attract more resources relative to its value added. The theoretical channels through which excessive finance may be detrimental for growth are still unclear. One possibility is that distorted incentives – deriving from the increasingly higher payoff coupled with limited downside risks – may lead managers to take hidden tail risks. That is, managers may have increasingly higher incentives to invest in assets offering generous compensation most of the time, but generating severe losses with small probability. These incentives may be further exacerbated by herding behaviour, as the performance of managers is often evaluated in comparison with that of peers. Herding behaviour, in turn, generates bubbles and makes the loss associated to the unlikely bad outcome even more severe than it would have been otherwise. During financial bubbles, the search for yield intensifies, risk-taking increases, and leverage in the system reaches unsustainable levels. The exponentially rising volume of financial assets and transactions, especially by highly leveraged and interconnected institutions, leads to financial fragility. Shocks to the system can lead to fire sales and asset price decreases, resulting in liquidity squeezes and solvency risks.Another channel through which an exceedingly large financial sector may have a negative impact on the real economy is the brain drain of human capital from other sectors, owing to the high compensation schemes in the financial profession. The overexpansion of the financial sector has induced banks to increase their demand for highly skilled employees, driving up the average wage of the industry. The depletion of human capital from other – potentially more productive - sectors may have a long term effect on economic growth. Although theoretical and empirical research on this channel has just started, I believe it is important for policy makers to have a better understanding of how financial excesses may produce significant macroeconomic distortions. And I have not mentioned the impact on fiscal balances yet. Market economies are based on the simple principle that economic agents reap the benefits and bear the risks from their actions. It is this trade-off which leads to optimal decision-making, given the available opportunities and the tolerance of risks. If, however, the costs of bad decisions are not entirely borne by the economic agent, significant distortions are introduced, leading to misallocation of resources. Therefore, as a fundamental principle, one has to ensure that incentives of all agents are correctly aligned with the cost and benefits of their financial decisions. Still, even when from an individual perspective agents seem to follow a sound behaviour, macro-financial factors, particularly related to the interconnectedness of financial markets and institutions, the interaction between finance and the macro-economy can contribute to the build-up and propagation of aggregate macro-systemic risks. These effects have been at the heart of the recent financial crisis and it has specifically highlighted the need for a macro-prudential approach to regulation and supervision, focusing on the financial system as a whole, complementing the existing micro-prudential framework. Macro-prudential policies aim to contain the build up of imbalances and ensure that the financial system is better able to withstand shocks. They will focus on regulatory and supervisory actions aimed at curbing the macro risks of financial market activity. In this regard, it Is, of course, of utmost importance to have a close co-operation and exchange of information between the institutions in charge of macro- and micro-prudential supervision.In the EU, the Ecofin Council has agreed to establish a new independent body responsible for macro-prudential supervision, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). The main task of the ESRB – in which the European System of Central Banks, the Supervisory Agencies of the 27 Member Countries as well as the newly created European authorities will play a key role – is to identify and assess risks to the stability of the EU financial system and issue risk warnings if systemic risks appear to be significant. If deemed appropriate, the ESRB can make explicit policy recommendation. However, the responsibility for the implementation of macro-prudential policies lies with national authorities.We live in very challenging times. Although the increased interconnectedness of global financial markets have facilitated the build up of imbalances and transmission of shocks, financially integrated markets have served Europe well and remain a necessary pre-condition for the proper functioning of the euro area. The ECB will therefore continue its efforts to promote closer integration of our financial system. At the same time we should be aware of the opportunities, but also the challenges and risks that new developments in financial markets pose to financial stability and to the functioning of the real economy. With its involvement in the ESRB, the ECB will continue to play an active role in safeguarding the financial stability of the euro area.[1]I would like to thank Simone Manganelli for his valuable input.[2]Volckart, Oliver and Nikolaus Wolf (2006). Estimating Financial Integration in the Middle Ages: What can we learn from a TAR-model?, Journal of Economic History 66, 1, 122-139, Late medieval financial market integration: the Hanseatic Area, the Holy Roman Empire and the Kingdom of Poland, c. 1300-1550, research project proposal by O. Volckart, London School of EconomicsReproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen pleasur speak confer today warsaw heterogen nation global financi market titl confer old phenomenon fact late mediev age th th centuri kingdom poland holi roman empir hanseat area form well financi integr area contribut special trade henc econom growth time fact despit exist mani currenc money easi transport financi integr rather advanc integr market good kingdom poland play particular role financi integr time key provid silver silver mine coin product also neighbour region today modern economi think financi integr main two posit impact first improv alloc effici capit second help diversif risk mission statement eurosystem well reflect state beyond overrid object maintain price stabil aim safeguard financi stabil promot european financi integr light recent event benefit financi integr sometim put question may look like two object safeguard financi stabil promot financi integr potenti conflict exact live increas interconnect world crisi sever widespread recent crisi still promot financi integr still believ reconcil financi integr financi stabil argu financi integr fact absolut necessari function euro area economi irrevers process promot may true financi integr pose risk financi stabil contagion foster greater interconnected benefit stem financi integr far outweigh cost tri convinc instead contain financi integr effort need direct better understand differ form financi develop particular relat two aspect name complex size opaqu product difficult understand may lead mispric risk distort alloc resourc respect size over larg financi system could negat effect function economi either drain mani resourc sector increas risk bubbl conclud consider establish european system risk board contribut enhanc stabil financi system view three element constitut integr financi market singl set rule ii equal access financi instrument servic iii equal treatment oper market condit satisfi price differ asset ident riskreturn characterist immedi arbitrag away definit stem intuit lack integr reflect exist barrier crossbord activ one think three main categori obstacl financi integr cultur legal technic recent academ research shown nonneglig psycholog cultur barrier financi integr cultur integr may take time integr polici european union eu explicit aim remov legal barrier build necessari technic infrastructur inde recent econom histori eu mark distinct effort aim remov barrier crossbord activ eu bank direct financi servic action plan white paper exampl eu initi aim creat true level play field financi sector financi integr essenti function euro area economi region financi system repres primari channel monetari polici affect economi stabl effici integr financi market basi smooth transmiss monetari polici monetari polici decis transmit equal across member countri eurosystem taken sinc launch euro proactiv stanc promot financi integr singl currenc area instanc establish integr european payment infrastructur creation eurosystem largevalu payment system target successor target instrument integr money market integr money market particular help recent crisi ecb react prompt success proven benefici effect provid liquid market therebi ensur proper smooth transmiss monetari polici therefor improv financi stabil lower degre financi integr would certain wrong measur undo reform pave way financi integr revert back retrench within nation border certain right strategi euro area would undesir global level admit financi integr generat greater interconnected turn may increas risk failur one part system may trigger chain reaction format expect could destabil effect financi isol opposit financi integr ration answer risk nowaday live global world financi also econom cultur link becom increas tighter news spread instantan shape global market sentiment product design assembl sold differ countri polit event small region send shockwav around world would naïv think countri could isol financi even possibl cost term lost effici product would far outweigh possibl benefit financi integr irrevers process process wish revers financ per se alway good form size reason fruit discuss financi develop refer process financi innov organis improv reduc asymmetr inform increas complet market reduc transact cost condit satisfi financ promot econom growth serv best societi larg inde well develop financi system serv primari function screen monitor invest project allow diversif risk facilit process price discoveri provid servic liquid transform match shortterm saver longterm borrow overal financ help lift financi constraint firm allow realis project posit net present valu would otherwis implement howev form financi innov may generat pervers incent reduc transpar overal weaken stabil financi system let take securitis exampl correct implement securitis allow risk transfer origin loan financi investor will hold risk turn generat effici alloc risk recent financi crisi howev highlight sever weak scheme relat misalign incent lack transpar poor risk manag form intermedi introduc sever layer manag investor invest manag incent place market mani instrument possibl compens main come collect fee investor hand attract relat higher return time low invest rate level sens secur provid among thing assess rate agenc ultim outcom instead dispers risk associ bank lend securitis opposit effect concentr bank system harm consequ financi stabil size financi sector anoth aspect deserv close scrutini financi system grow larg may eventu lead misalloc resourc cours acknowledg develop credit market import busi startup howev financ crucial element schumpeterian process creativ destruct recent financi crisi also highlight role larg financi market play downsid risk grow number academ opinion maker question theori effect financi market growth alway posit increas relationship may well nonlinear reason size financi market help alloc resourc effici promot econom growth howev grow larger may well financi market may exert decreas margin contribut growth extrem case size financi system exceed threshold effect growth could even turn negat fact financi system grow proport respect econom fundament may go hand hand creation exceed complex financi product herd behaviour materi tail risk may attract resourc relat valu ad theoret channel excess financ may detriment growth still unclear one possibl distort incent deriv increas higher payoff coupl limit downsid risk may lead manag take hidden tail risk manag may increas higher incent invest asset offer generous compens time generat sever loss small probabl incent may exacerb herd behaviour perform manag often evalu comparison peer herd behaviour turn generat bubbl make loss associ unlik bad outcom even sever would otherwis financi bubbl search yield intensifi risktak increas leverag system reach unsustain level exponenti rise volum financi asset transact especi high leverag interconnect institut lead financi fragil shock system lead fire sale asset price decreas result liquid squeez solvenc risk anoth channel exceed larg financi sector may negat impact real economi brain drain human capit sector owe high compens scheme financi profess overexpans financi sector induc bank increas demand high skill employe drive averag wage industri deplet human capit potenti product sector may long term effect econom growth although theoret empir research channel start believ import polici maker better understand financi excess may produc signific macroeconom distort mention impact fiscal balanc yet market economi base simpl principl econom agent reap benefit bear risk action tradeoff lead optim decisionmak given avail opportun toler risk howev cost bad decis entir born econom agent signific distort introduc lead misalloc resourc therefor fundament principl one ensur incent agent correct align cost benefit financi decis still even individu perspect agent seem follow sound behaviour macrofinanci factor particular relat interconnected financi market institut interact financ macroeconomi contribut buildup propag aggreg macrosystem risk effect heart recent financi crisi specif highlight need macroprudenti approach regul supervis focus financi system whole complement exist microprudenti framework macroprudenti polici aim contain build imbal ensur financi system better abl withstand shock focus regulatori supervisori action aim curb macro risk financi market activ regard cours utmost import close cooper exchang inform institut charg macro microprudenti supervis eu ecofin council agre establish new independ bodi respons macroprudenti supervis european system risk board esrb main task esrb european system central bank supervisori agenc member countri well newli creat european author play key role identifi assess risk stabil eu financi system issu risk warn system risk appear signific deem appropri esrb make explicit polici recommend howev respons implement macroprudenti polici lie nation author live challeng time although increas interconnected global financi market facilit build imbal transmiss shock financi integr market serv europ well remain necessari precondit proper function euro area ecb therefor continu effort promot closer integr financi system time awar opportun also challeng risk new develop financi market pose financi stabil function real economi involv esrb ecb continu play activ role safeguard financi stabil euro area would like thank simon manganelli valuabl input volckart oliv nikolaus wolf estim financi integr middl age learn tarmodel journal econom histori late mediev financi market integr hanseat area holi roman empir kingdom poland c research project propos o volckart london school economicsreproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en