Peter Praet: Heterogeneity in a monetary union: What have we learned?,15-06-2012,European Central Bank,ECB,2789,"<p>It is a great pleasure to be speaking here today at what has, over the years, become a prime opportunity for the European Central Bank to exchange views with ECB watchers on the challenges faced by monetary policy in the euro area. My remarks today [1] will focus on the question of how imbalances in terms of competitiveness and private and public sector debt have gradually led to a worrying degree of heterogeneity in the euro area. I will also highlight the effects of the ECB’s liquidity-providing operations, arguing that these contribute to more homogeneous financial conditions across the euro area and allow a smoother adjustment process during the transitional period needed in order to reabsorb accumulated imbalances. I will, however, also argue that these operations can only be regarded as temporary support, as the underlying structural problems and weaknesses require a truly structural response completing the overall architecture of EMU.When the euro was first introduced, many critics claimed that EMU would not work because euro area countries’ business cycles and economic structures were not sufficiently similar. But does economic integration really need to imply economic uniformity? I do not think so. This can clearly be seen in the United States. Regional economies are hit by different economic shocks and perform differently owing to their differing economic structures, even over extended periods. At the same time, institutional safeguards are required in order to ensure that heterogeneous developments do not become self-reinforcing and pose a threat to overall macroeconomic stability. Here in the euro area, we have to acknowledge that economic conditions have, today, become increasingly heterogeneous. But let me state very clearly up front that this does not imply that a common currency cannot succeed in the euro area. To my mind, this means that we need to address the institutional shortcomings and weaknesses of EMU in order to allow the euro area to cope with heterogeneous economic developments and large asymmetric shocks, as is the case in the United States. There, too, economic and monetary union did not occur overnight; it was a long process.Otmar Issing [2] argued, more than a decade ago, that “one size must fit all”. Provided that institutions adapt, EMU should be beneficial for all. Since the introduction of the euro, many of us have been aware of institutional deficiencies, both in terms of the prevention of imbalances and as regards the management of such imbalances in the event of a crisis. The crisis is now forcing us to address these deficiencies. Allow me, in the remainder of my remarks, to look at how and why imbalances arose in the euro area and how the ECB’s monetary policy responded to them. The situation prior to the financial crisis is best described as one in which euro area countries achieved a very high degree of convergence in terms of financial conditions, while at the same time large macroeconomic and financial imbalances were gradually accumulating.With the advent of the euro, there was significant convergence in terms of the financial conditions in the various euro area countries. Euro area banks were able to trade with one another in a unified money market. Consequently, there was also significant convergence in terms of the interest rates that banks charged households and firms. Indeed, these are necessary conditions for a single monetary policy that affects all economic agents in the same way. However, the sovereign bonds of the various euro area countries were also priced at rates that were very similar, with those rates bearing little relation to the fiscal and macroeconomic fundamentals of the individual countries. With the benefit of hindsight, this is a puzzling outcome. Clearly, a single monetary policy should imply a single money market interest rate, as well as a single long-term risk-free interest rate. And with inflation expectations converging across the euro area, sovereign bond yields could be expected to become less dispersed. However, despite the single monetary policy, differences in the default risk of individual countries, consumers and firms remained. But financial markets were less wary of such risks, thereby establishing improper incentives for public and private sector borrowers.One simple summary indicator of the degree of economic heterogeneity is cross‑country inflation differentials. These reflect differences between countries in terms of the business cycle, productivity growth and the functioning of labour and product markets. They also affect countries’ real interest rates, as well as the international price competitiveness of their goods and services. Monetary union resulted in inflation differentials in the euro area falling to a level comparable to the United States. However, although the two had inflation differentials of a similar size, the persistence of those seen in the euro area remained much greater, pointing to the possible existence of macroeconomic imbalances. As a result, since the introduction of the euro, the persistent inflation differentials in the euro area gave rise to a divergence of relative prices that is twice as large as the one observed in the United States. (Slide 2)The main driver of those persistent inflation differentials is related to the cross‑country differences observed since the introduction of the euro in the implementation of structural reforms and has little to do with real convergence or so‑called “Balassa-Samuelson effects”. In some euro area countries, governments failed to implement the necessary reforms in their product and labour markets. Consequently, wage growth exceeded productivity growth and prices rose faster than in other countries. (Slide 3) These inflation differentials led to divergent developments in international competitiveness and contributed to the accumulation of unprecedented current account positions in the euro area. (Slide 4)In a number of countries, this all led to economic activity gradually shifting away from the more export-oriented manufacturing industry towards the more domestically oriented construction sector. Because sectoral reallocation is typically a slow process, it is very difficult to now readjust those countries’ economies quickly in response to the crisis. In addition, in most countries there is a high degree of downward wage rigidity, which is a further impediment to rapid adjustment.Moreover, the persistently higher inflation rates in some countries implied persistently lower real interest rates, particularly in light of the high degree of convergence in terms of nominal lending rates. Countries with lower real interest rates experienced stronger credit growth and housing booms, which placed further pressure on wages and prices. (Slide 5) Lower real interest rates also meant that it was easier for governments to borrow, slowing down fiscal consolidation. Governments did not adopt sufficiently counter-cyclical policies to limit their own accumulation of debt or to counteract the accumulation of debt in the private sector. In fact, because those economic booms were based on stronger domestic consumption and rising property prices, they led to improvements in cyclical fiscal balances as long as the boom went on, so that governments had few incentives to tighten fiscal policy before the bust set in. [3]The question naturally arises as to why this unsustainable degree of heterogeneity occurred in the euro area and not the United States. In the United States, regional imbalances tend to be more mean-reverting, owing to higher levels of labour mobility and more flexible product and labour markets. At the same time, there is also less scope for unsustainable accumulation of debt at state level. Most states have adopted legislation that prevents them from accumulating the levels of debt seen in the euro area. [4]The institutional design of the euro area has clearly given rise to moral hazard and lacked the capacity to credibly engage in measures to prevent rising imbalances. [5] Although there was an unseen accumulation of debt in some euro area countries, financial markets were allowed to set financial conditions in such a way that private and public sector borrowers in those countries could essentially continue to borrow at the same interest rates as borrowers in countries with much sounder fiscal and macroeconomic fundamentals. As a result, financial flows ran from countries with strong productivity growth to countries with weak productivity growth, fuelling a persistent economic boom based on the accumulation of debt. To be efficient, financial flows should instead have run towards countries with higher levels of productivity growth. The financial crisis has led to a strong increase in heterogeneity within the euro area. The re-emergence of cross-country differentials in terms of financial conditions has contributed to divergence in macroeconomic and financial fundamentals. Conversely, these heterogeneous financial conditions mainly reflect persistent fiscal, macroeconomic and financial imbalances, as well as persistent structural problems in several countries. The first dimension of heterogeneity concerns real developments. Some countries have recovered well while others continue to be affected by persistent structural problems. But some of the macroeconomic imbalances have begun to adjust. Competitiveness has improved in countries where labour costs used to persistently exceed the euro area average. That being said, such adjustment has remained too limited. Sizeable imbalances persist, particularly high levels of public and private sector debt and vulnerabilities in the financial sector. Looking ahead, it is of the essence that government policies decisively address these various fiscal, financial and structural impediments to growth. This brings me to the second – and most evident – dimension of heterogeneity, namely the sharp divergence observed in financial conditions in euro area countries. In the course of the crisis, secured and unsecured money markets have become increasingly impaired, especially across national borders. Countries’ sovereign bond yields have diverged significantly. Corporate bond markets have also experienced tensions. Overall, there is ample evidence that country-specific factors have become more important in driving yields. The emergence of fragmented financial markets within the euro area began in the aftermath of Lehman Brothers’ default and intensified following the onset of the sovereign debt crisis in May 2010. Financial integration came to a halt and was partly reversed, as can be seen from the fact that non-bank debt securities were increasingly purchased domestically, with non-domestic euro area holders selling these bonds. (Slide 6) Euro area countries’ financial sectors retreated within national borders.As a result of those fragmented financial conditions, the transmission of the ECB’s monetary policy stance to interest rates was increasingly impaired. Moreover, banks in countries in which government finances were under strain faced restricted access to the money market and other sources of financing, given the interconnectedness between banks and sovereign states. Had this been allowed to continue, these funding restrictions would probably have hampered growth in credit to households and non‑financial corporations. This, combined with deleveraging needs, could have resulted in a “credit crunch” in several parts of the euro area, with negative consequences for the economy and price stability in the euro area.In reacting to this exceptional degree of heterogeneity, the ECB’s monetary policy continued to be guided by its objective of ensuring price stability for the euro area as a whole. Key ECB interest rates were reduced significantly. In addition, non-standard measures were adopted in order to support the functioning of the transmission mechanism by bringing back liquidity to dysfunctional markets. For instance, in light of the constraints in funding markets for banks, the maturities of longer-term refinancing operations were successively extended, culminating in the three-year operations conducted in December 2011 and February 2012. Following these operations, funding constraints have eased, with money market spreads declining. (Slides 7 and 8) Moreover, the already broad collateral framework has been extended further, with corresponding risk control measures to mitigate the Eurosystem’s exposure to risk. This has made it easier for collateral-constrained banks to continue to participate in refinancing operations. Overall, banks’ recourse to refinancing operations has been particularly strong in those countries that have been worst affected by the crisis. While open to all, the ECB’s non-standard measures have been used most intensively in countries facing financial stress. Cross-country differences in the use of non-standard measures have thus largely reflected heterogeneity in financial conditions across the euro area. Our policy measures have helped to reduce heterogeneity in financial conditions thereby ensuring a smoother transmission of monetary policy across the euro area.The extent of the heterogeneity in banks’ financing needs can also be inferred from national central banks’ balances in TARGET2. These balances reflect the national central banks’ net claims or liabilities resulting from commercial banks’ cross-border payments in TARGET2. The increasing net liabilities of some national central banks are a reflection mainly of funding stress in their individual banking systems, with financial outflows being compensated for by increased recourse to Eurosystem refinancing operations. (Slide 9) Our policy measures have, in particular, increased the ECB’s intermediation between banks. Looking at the interbank market, reduced willingness to lend, especially across borders, has hampered the distribution of liquidity to those banks that are most in need of it, particularly banks in countries facing financial stress. Increases in deposits held with the Eurosystem by banks in financially strong countries can be seen as an indication of the degree of disintermediation in the money market. (Slide 10) Banks in such countries tend to be recipients of cross-border payment flows and therefore need less central bank liquidity than banks in countries facing financial stress. The surplus of central bank liquidity in banks in financially stronger countries has raised concerns that such liquidity could fuel asset price bubbles in parts of the euro area, potentially posing a threat to price stability. These concerns are not warranted at the current juncture. Thus far, only a moderate recovery has been seen in asset prices. As regards the housing market, developments in money and credit – traditionally good leading indicators of booms in house prices – have remained subdued. However, we will continue to pay close attention to such developments. To sum up, the measures adopted by the ECB have contributed to greater homogeneity in the pass‑through of policy rates to the economy, with a view to maintaining price stability. However, monetary policy cannot provide a lasting solution to the underlying problems causing this persistent heterogeneity. While the ECB can help to ensure a smooth adjustment process and offer temporary relief, this cannot replace the necessary structural adjustment. Instead, governments need to act in a variety of policy areas – particularly as regards fiscal consolidation, structural reforms and financial stability – within a reinforced governance framework at the European level. This is the only way that we can put the euro area back on a sustainable growth path. The crisis has highlighted several shortcomings in the institutional framework of EMU, and these need to be addressed. This framework failed to ensure sound fiscal discipline in all euro area countries, as well as to prevent or correct the accumulation of financial and competitiveness imbalances. Crisis management and financial sector repair – such as the rescue and resolution of financial institutions – were left to national authorities, despite considerable cross-border activity in the financial sector. We saw only too clearly that the interconnectedness of banks and sovereign states can lead to adverse feedback loops between sovereign and bank financial conditions, with significant consequences for the macroeconomic stability of the euro area as a whole. Several steps have already been taken with a view to enhancing the governance framework for EMU and improving the prevention and correction of fiscal, macroeconomic and competitiveness imbalances. At the same time, an overhaul of the framework for financial supervision and regulation has been initiated. Finally, firewalls and crisis management instruments have been established in order to further safeguard financial stability, particularly by addressing the risk of contagion across countries and financial market segments. Looking ahead, further steps will need to be taken in order to supplement the single monetary policy with a more integrated framework for bank supervision, resolution and deposit insurance, as well as far more extensive coordination of government policies affecting competitiveness. As the President said this morning, if we are to achieve this, euro area countries will inevitably need to surrender more national sovereignty and increase their coordination of national policies. The global economy is becoming increasingly integrated. The importance of national sovereignty has been waning as a result of increasing economic interdependence at the global level. It is an illusion to think that, in an integrated world, countries will be able to decouple themselves from developments in other countries. Thank you for your attention.[1]I would like to thank Maarten Dossche and Arthur Saint-Guilhem for their contribution to the preparation of this speech. [2]Issing, O., “The single monetary policy of the European Central Bank: One size fits all”, International Finance, 4:3, 2001, pp. 441-462.[3]See, for instance, Bénétrix, A. and Lane, P., Fiscal cyclicality and EMU, Trinity College Dublin, mimeo, 2012.[4]See, for instance, Henning, R. and Kessler, M., “Fiscal federalism: US history for architects of Europe’s fiscal union”, Bruegel Essay and Lecture Series, 2012. [5]See, for instance, Persson, T. and Tabellini, G., “Federal fiscal constitutions: risk sharing and moral hazard”, Econometrica, 64, 1996, pp. 623-646.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",great pleasur speak today year becom prime opportun european central bank exchang view ecb watcher challeng face monetari polici euro area remark today focus question imbal term competit privat public sector debt gradual led worri degre heterogen euro area also highlight effect ecb liquidityprovid oper argu contribut homogen financi condit across euro area allow smoother adjust process transit period need order reabsorb accumul imbal howev also argu oper regard temporari support under structur problem weak requir truli structur respons complet overal architectur emu euro first introduc mani critic claim emu would work euro area countri busi cycl econom structur suffici similar econom integr realli need impli econom uniform think clear seen unit state region economi hit differ econom shock perform differ owe differ econom structur even extend period time institut safeguard requir order ensur heterogen develop becom selfreinforc pose threat overal macroeconom stabil euro area acknowledg econom condit today becom increas heterogen let state clear front impli common currenc cannot succeed euro area mind mean need address institut shortcom weak emu order allow euro area cope heterogen econom develop larg asymmetr shock case unit state econom monetari union occur overnight long process otmar iss argu decad ago one size must fit provid institut adapt emu benefici sinc introduct euro mani us awar institut defici term prevent imbal regard manag imbal event crisi crisi forc us address defici allow remaind remark look imbal aros euro area ecb monetari polici respond situat prior financi crisi best describ one euro area countri achiev high degre converg term financi condit time larg macroeconom financi imbal gradual accumul advent euro signific converg term financi condit various euro area countri euro area bank abl trade one anoth unifi money market consequ also signific converg term interest rate bank charg household firm inde necessari condit singl monetari polici affect econom agent way howev sovereign bond various euro area countri also price rate similar rate bear littl relat fiscal macroeconom fundament individu countri benefit hindsight puzzl outcom clear singl monetari polici impli singl money market interest rate well singl longterm riskfre interest rate inflat expect converg across euro area sovereign bond yield could expect becom less dispers howev despit singl monetari polici differ default risk individu countri consum firm remain financi market less wari risk therebi establish improp incent public privat sector borrow one simpl summari indic degre econom heterogen cross countri inflat differenti reflect differ countri term busi cycl product growth function labour product market also affect countri real interest rate well intern price competit good servic monetari union result inflat differenti euro area fall level compar unit state howev although two inflat differenti similar size persist seen euro area remain much greater point possibl exist macroeconom imbal result sinc introduct euro persist inflat differenti euro area gave rise diverg relat price twice larg one observ unit state slide main driver persist inflat differenti relat cross countri differ observ sinc introduct euro implement structur reform littl real converg call balassasamuelson effect euro area countri govern fail implement necessari reform product labour market consequ wage growth exceed product growth price rose faster countri slide inflat differenti led diverg develop intern competit contribut accumul unpreced current account posit euro area slide number countri led econom activ gradual shift away exportori manufactur industri toward domest orient construct sector sector realloc typic slow process difficult readjust countri economi quick respons crisi addit countri high degre downward wage rigid impedi rapid adjust moreov persist higher inflat rate countri impli persist lower real interest rate particular light high degre converg term nomin lend rate countri lower real interest rate experienc stronger credit growth hous boom place pressur wage price slide lower real interest rate also meant easier govern borrow slow fiscal consolid govern adopt suffici countercycl polici limit accumul debt counteract accumul debt privat sector fact econom boom base stronger domest consumpt rise properti price led improv cyclic fiscal balanc long boom went govern incent tighten fiscal polici bust set question natur aris unsustain degre heterogen occur euro area unit state unit state region imbal tend meanrevert owe higher level labour mobil flexibl product labour market time also less scope unsustain accumul debt state level state adopt legisl prevent accumul level debt seen euro area institut design euro area clear given rise moral hazard lack capac credibl engag measur prevent rise imbal although unseen accumul debt euro area countri financi market allow set financi condit way privat public sector borrow countri could essenti continu borrow interest rate borrow countri much sounder fiscal macroeconom fundament result financi flow ran countri strong product growth countri weak product growth fuell persist econom boom base accumul debt effici financi flow instead run toward countri higher level product growth financi crisi led strong increas heterogen within euro area reemerg crosscountri differenti term financi condit contribut diverg macroeconom financi fundament convers heterogen financi condit main reflect persist fiscal macroeconom financi imbal well persist structur problem sever countri first dimens heterogen concern real develop countri recov well other continu affect persist structur problem macroeconom imbal begun adjust competit improv countri labour cost use persist exceed euro area averag said adjust remain limit sizeabl imbal persist particular high level public privat sector debt vulner financi sector look ahead essenc govern polici decis address various fiscal financi structur impedi growth bring second evid dimens heterogen name sharp diverg observ financi condit euro area countri cours crisi secur unsecur money market becom increas impair especi across nation border countri sovereign bond yield diverg signific corpor bond market also experienc tension overal ampl evid countryspecif factor becom import drive yield emerg fragment financi market within euro area began aftermath lehman brother default intensifi follow onset sovereign debt crisi may financi integr came halt part revers seen fact nonbank debt secur increas purchas domest nondomest euro area holder sell bond slide euro area countri financi sector retreat within nation border result fragment financi condit transmiss ecb monetari polici stanc interest rate increas impair moreov bank countri govern financ strain face restrict access money market sourc financ given interconnected bank sovereign state allow continu fund restrict would probabl hamper growth credit household non financi corpor combin deleverag need could result credit crunch sever part euro area negat consequ economi price stabil euro area react except degre heterogen ecb monetari polici continu guid object ensur price stabil euro area whole key ecb interest rate reduc signific addit nonstandard measur adopt order support function transmiss mechan bring back liquid dysfunct market instanc light constraint fund market bank matur longerterm refinanc oper success extend culmin threeyear oper conduct decemb februari follow oper fund constraint eas money market spread declin slide moreov alreadi broad collater framework extend correspond risk control measur mitig eurosystem exposur risk made easier collateralconstrain bank continu particip refinanc oper overal bank recours refinanc oper particular strong countri worst affect crisi open ecb nonstandard measur use intens countri face financi stress crosscountri differ use nonstandard measur thus larg reflect heterogen financi condit across euro area polici measur help reduc heterogen financi condit therebi ensur smoother transmiss monetari polici across euro area extent heterogen bank financ need also infer nation central bank balanc target balanc reflect nation central bank net claim liabil result commerci bank crossbord payment target increas net liabil nation central bank reflect main fund stress individu bank system financi outflow compens increas recours eurosystem refinanc oper slide polici measur particular increas ecb intermedi bank look interbank market reduc willing lend especi across border hamper distribut liquid bank need particular bank countri face financi stress increas deposit held eurosystem bank financi strong countri seen indic degre disintermedi money market slide bank countri tend recipi crossbord payment flow therefor need less central bank liquid bank countri face financi stress surplus central bank liquid bank financi stronger countri rais concern liquid could fuel asset price bubbl part euro area potenti pose threat price stabil concern warrant current junctur thus far moder recoveri seen asset price regard hous market develop money credit tradit good lead indic boom hous price remain subdu howev continu pay close attent develop sum measur adopt ecb contribut greater homogen pass polici rate economi view maintain price stabil howev monetari polici cannot provid last solut under problem caus persist heterogen ecb help ensur smooth adjust process offer temporari relief cannot replac necessari structur adjust instead govern need act varieti polici area particular regard fiscal consolid structur reform financi stabil within reinforc govern framework european level way put euro area back sustain growth path crisi highlight sever shortcom institut framework emu need address framework fail ensur sound fiscal disciplin euro area countri well prevent correct accumul financi competit imbal crisi manag financi sector repair rescu resolut financi institut left nation author despit consider crossbord activ financi sector saw clear interconnected bank sovereign state lead advers feedback loop sovereign bank financi condit signific consequ macroeconom stabil euro area whole sever step alreadi taken view enhanc govern framework emu improv prevent correct fiscal macroeconom competit imbal time overhaul framework financi supervis regul initi final firewal crisi manag instrument establish order safeguard financi stabil particular address risk contagion across countri financi market segment look ahead step need taken order supplement singl monetari polici integr framework bank supervis resolut deposit insur well far extens coordin govern polici affect competit presid said morn achiev euro area countri inevit need surrend nation sovereignti increas coordin nation polici global economi becom increas integr import nation sovereignti wane result increas econom interdepend global level illus think integr world countri abl decoupl develop countri thank attent would like thank maarten dossch arthur saintguilhem contribut prepar speech iss o singl monetari polici european central bank one size fit intern financ pp see instanc bénétrix lane p fiscal cyclic emu triniti colleg dublin mimeo see instanc hen r kessler m fiscal feder us histori architect europ fiscal union bruegel essay lectur seri see instanc persson tabellini g feder fiscal constitut risk share moral hazard econometrica pp reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en