Mario Draghi: Memorial lecture in honour of Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa,09-07-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,3254,"<p>***SummaryThe governance of structural reforms deserves as much attention as enforcing fiscal rules and should be done at the euro area level, ECB President Mario Draghi said in a speech in London on Wednesday.Structural reforms need strong domestic ownership since they reach deeply into societal arrangements. But at the same time, the example of the International Monetary Fund shows that there is a convincing case to be made for a supranational body that makes it easier to frame national debates on reform. This can shift the debate from whether to how to implement reforms, Mr Draghi argues.The outcome of structural reforms – a higher level of productivity and competitiveness – is not merely in a country’s own interest, but in the interest of the monetary union as a whole.In the euro area, there is therefore a case for establishing rules on structural reform at the EU-level. While a lack of reform can threaten cohesion of the union, the recovery shows us how decisive reform can strengthen it.***Ladies and gentlemen,The belief that there are interests of the people that cannot be safeguarded by purely national authorities, and that require the establishment of supra-national institutions, was a constant motivation through the life and work of Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa. It is also this belief that motivated the involvement of Tommaso in your work to develop global accounting standards. More than 100 countries speak the same accounting language today, whereas a decade ago, no major economy used the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). I trust that the momentum will be kept, and in particular that European policy-makers will progress swiftly in the adoption of IFRS 9.But where Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa’s deep-rooted convictions found their most pronounced expression was in his constant support for European integration and his seminal contribution to the creation of the euro.At the end of a recent press conference, I said that the crisis would not have been as severe if we had had more, not less, integration in Europe; and that our future lies with more integration, not the renationalisation of our economies. I suspect Tommaso would have agreed. Sovereignty in the European Union is not only a normative concept linked to the rights of states. It is also a positive concept. A sovereign that cannot effectively deliver the expectations of its citizens is only sovereign in name. Genuine sovereignty exists only if policy-making is effective. This notion of the efficacy of public powers is reflected in the principle of subsidiarity embedded in the EU Treaties – or what is known as the federalist principle in the United States – the logic of which was elegantly captured by John Locke in the 1680s:“For all power given with trust for attaining an end, (…) whenever that end is manifestly neglected (…) that power must devolve in the hands of those that gave it, who may place it anew where they shall think best for their safety and security”.European integration has, in effect, been a process of progressively applying this principle: governments have pooled sovereignty every time it has proved necessary so that they could continue to deliver on their duties towards their people. At the start of the process, the objective was to prevent continental war. Two world wars had demonstrated the inability of European governments, acting alone, to provide physical security for their citizens. Thus, they established common institutions, such as the Coal and Steel Authority, that could guarantee peace more effectively.In parallel, and quite independent of policy actions, economic integration has also progressed, in a more gradual but also more continuous process. Such integration results indeed at least as much from technological developments and improvements in transportation and communication as it does from policy choices. It is, in large parts, inescapable. But because it creates far-reaching interdependencies, it has required governments to respond. They have had to proactively choose to pool sovereignty to regain control of their economies. With the establishment of the Single Market, in particular, the pace and reach of integration accelerated markedly. This was of course its purpose – and it remains the most significant and successful achievement of the European Union. But a free market does not only assume the freedom to take part. It also assumes the means to protect that freedom, by which I refer to the protection of property rights, the enforcement of contracts, the conditions of fair competition and the avoidance of moral hazard. Economic integration therefore required integration of some economic policies.The euro itself emerged in fact as a corollary of the Single Market. It was conceived, as early as the late 1950s, as a response to the costs associated with exchange rate frictions within a single market, which at the beginning was only for agricultural products. Already in 1944, in an influential study commissioned by the League of Nations, the great economist Ragnar Nurkse had warned convincingly of the economic losses resulting from currency volatility. Tommaso himself later argued in his “inconsistent quartet” that free trade, free capital movement, fixed exchange rates and independent monetary policies were ultimately incompatible.And the euro itself has had consequences. Some of these were identified early, in particular with respect to fiscal governance. Some were fully acknowledged only later, such as the pervasive effects of macroeconomic imbalances. But in both cases, the crisis showed that the cohesion of the Union in fact relied on the behaviour of each of its members. This is why I believe that the case for community-level governance does not apply only to fiscal policy, or to the banking union, but also to structural reforms, as I will endeavour to explain.The case for fiscal governance at the community level is well understood, and stems from the negative externalities that unsound public finances in a Member State can generate for its neighbours. The crisis not only validated this concern; it reinforced it, by showing that externalities could be even more pervasive than initially thought.The fiscal soundness of a government is obviously first and foremost in the interest of its own country. Countries with excessively stretched public finances can lose the ability to use fiscal policy as a counter-cyclical stabilisation tool. Indeed, this ability relies on the government being able to access markets under favourable conditions at the time when it needs to, at the trough of the cycle. As we have seen during the crisis, this cannot be taken for granted when doubts arise about the sustainability of the debt.This would be problematic anywhere but it is more so in a monetary union, as the common monetary policy can only aim at price stability for the euro area as a whole. It cannot cater specifically for asymmetric shocks. In the absence of a federal budget, like we see in the United States, the soundness of government credit everywhere is of paramount importance to counteract regional slumps.If some governments retain the ability to stabilise their economies but others do not, then it becomes more plausible that economic divergence will occur. This is one channel through which the cohesion of the Union can be affected. This ability depends on keeping debt low and budget deficits close to zero when output grows at potential, not on having more flexibility in the existing rules.Keeping one’s own house in order also has a further benefit: it helps mitigate the effects of contagion. As we have seen during the crisis, those governments that had more robust fiscal positions were much less affected by contagion – at the extreme they even benefited from safe-haven status.This protection, however, is not absolute, because it relies on the ability of markets to discriminate between sound and unsound debtors. Yet bubbles and panic happen. A bubble is a situation where markets ignore fundamentals, even if debtors are unsound. For too long, markets failed to raise funding costs for countries with unsustainable policies. And a panic is a situation where markets also ignore fundamentals, but this time to the detriment of sound debtors.In fact, the main channel of contagion within a monetary union is not direct exposures between one country and another. It is the fact that if a precedent set in one country is seen to be replicable elsewhere, it can affect the conditions of market access for all. Put differently, the main channel of financial contagion is not the asset side of balance sheets, but the liability side.We perhaps saw this effect most clearly with the fragmentation of the banking sector three years ago. Fears that one country could leave the euro resulted not just in that country being cut off financially, but in fragmentation everywhere. This fragmentation created considerable damage. The renationalisation of finance hindered the homogenous transmission of monetary policy across borders. And it resulted in a divergence of financial conditions across the euro area. This initiated an economic divergence process, which, in turn, could have challenged the sustainability of the euro area.The ECB therefore had to act and we did – through the creation of the Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) programme – to nip in the bud unwarranted fears of a euro area break-up, and prevent an adverse equilibrium from becoming entrenched through prophecies that were as much false as they were self-fulfilling. It was necessary to protect the monetary transmission process. And it was necessary to protect price stability, which is essential for the cohesion of the Union. The threats to price stability today do not come from unfounded fears of a break-up of the euro, but from the consequences of changes in other factors, such as energy and food prices, relative price adjustment in stressed countries, exchange rate behaviour, weak demand and high unemployment. Nonetheless, those threats are real and to cope with them the Governing Council is determined to keep the monetary policy stance accommodative for an extended period of time. Moreover, the Governing Council is unanimous in its commitment to also using unconventional instruments within its mandate, should it become necessary to further address risks of too prolonged a period of low inflation. We are strongly determined to safeguard the firm anchoring of inflation expectations over the medium to long term.The lesson I draw from the fragmentation we have experienced is that the cohesion of the Union is in the fundamental interest of all of its members. If it is called into question, as we have experienced first-hand, the consequences cannot be anticipated with total certainty, but they are detrimental to all.It is therefore of considerable relevance and importance that Europe has already made extensive progress in strengthening its rules, for example through the fiscal compact. What is essential now is that these rules are enforced. To unwind the consolidation that has been achieved, and in doing so to divest the rules of credibility, would be self-defeating for all countries, for three reasons.First, the high level of indebtedness in almost all euro area countries implies a higher vulnerability to market pressure and contagion, if the euro area faces further economic or financial shocks. The higher the level of debt, the greater the probability of falling into a bad equilibrium, where high rates lead to defaults. Second, if fiscal rules are applied by national governments to achieve not only stability but also sustainable growth, they do not in my view clash with national ownership of the budget. Fiscal rules should be viewed in the national debate as promoting growth-friendly fiscal consolidation and not simply as a painful accounting exercise. Third, respecting the rules matters because it is a prerequisite for any other form of integration. It is only by demonstrating a willingness to fulfil their commitments that Member States can achieve the degree of mutual trust that is a pre-requisite of integration in other areas. Indeed, any pooling of sovereignty requires a great amount of mutual confidence, in particular in the fiscal area, which is traditionally seen as a prerogative of national parliaments.This same reasoning that I am applying to the fiscal framework can, to a large extent, be extended to other areas of economic policy. In particular, I think there is a case for some form of common governance over structural reforms. This is because the outcome of structural reforms – a continuously high level of productivity and competitiveness – is not merely in a country’s own interest. It is in the interest of the Union as a whole.The Single Market and the single currency were conceived as a sort of ‘Ricardian’ union, meaning a union in which each country, each sector and each firm can exploit its comparative advantages. I do not think there is any disagreement that the Single Market was a success. But it is not enough for the cohesion of the Union that the Single Market and the single currency constitute a positive-sum game, in the sense that their existence raises aggregate welfare. The cohesion of the euro area relies on the fact that it is Pareto-improving: it must be the case that all the countries are better off inside the Union than they would be outside. And it is obviously not enough that this is true only at the moment when they join. It has to be true continuously.There are many instances around the world of political unions whose cohesion is maintained because the weaker regions or states benefit from recurrent fiscal transfers from their peers, typically through the operations of a central budget. It is then possible for those weaker regions to maintain recurrent external deficits, while the stronger regions post permanent surpluses. This is the case in the United States, for instance, but it is also true within most individual countries in Europe.In the euro area, however, while there are cohesion funds for catching-up countries, and private credit flows can finance temporary imbalances, permanent fiscal transfers between Member States are not envisaged. So, in the medium term, each economy has to stand on its own feet. It has to be productive and competitive enough to benefit from the opportunities afforded by the Single Market.We can do and have done much to reduce imbalances that are generated by factors other than lack of competitiveness and structural weaknesses. External imbalances have been decreasing since the announcement of OMTs. Persisting imbalances, however, could eventually undermine the economic and political cohesion of our Union. And, as I have already discussed, any threat to the cohesion and sustainability of the Union has pervasive effects for all, in the form of contagion, and uncertainty which weighs on investment.This is where structural reforms play a crucial role – and perhaps an even more important role in the euro area than in other unions. Markets can be opened through EU legislation. But it is only through structural reforms that firms and individuals can be enabled to take full advantage of that openness.Indeed, the intention of the Single Market was to free individuals and firms, within a market where no distinction would be made on account of nationality or place of establishment. This is why competition policy is enforced at the EU level, so that no firm is protected by its nationality.By the same token, no firm or individual should be penalised by its country of residence. Yet, firms face very different operating environments across the euro area, which can prevent them from exploiting the advantages of the market. For example, the World Economic Forum ranks Finland third in the world in terms of global competitiveness, whereas Greece is ranked 91st. The World Bank ranks Ireland 15th in the world in terms of ease of doing business, whereas Malta is ranked 103rd. The persistence of such differences creates the risk of permanent imbalances. With this in mind, I believe that structural reforms in each country are enough of a common interest to justify that they are made subject to discipline at the community level. I see two reasons why this approach could be favourable to national governments today.The first is that, over the past few years, we have seen both the risks associated with insufficient competitiveness in some Member States and the benefit of structural reforms. We have witnessed the accumulation of external imbalances in peripheral economies prior to the crisis, and how that left them vulnerable to “sudden stop” dynamics. And more recently, we have seen the improvement that has taken place when governments implemented reform. The change in current account positions in stressed countries ranges from an almost 11 percentage point correction of GDP in Spain to a 16 percentage point improvement in GDP in Greece, only part of which is explained by lower imports in the context of a recession.In fact, the return of market confidence in the euro area results mainly from the acknowledgement that individual governments, in particular in some of the most stressed countries, have taken significant corrective action and will continue to do so where needed. So while lack of reform can threaten the cohesion of the Union, we can already see how decisive reform can strengthen it.But we are only at the beginning. The final judgment now rests on our being able to show that cohesion also produces growth and jobs.The second reason why a stronger role for the Union could be beneficial is that, similar to fiscal policies, establishing rules at the level of the Union may in fact help national authorities implement reform. Structural reforms reach deep enough into societal arrangements and practices that they can only succeed if they are made the object of strong domestic ownership. At the same time, those reforms require substantial political capital. Historical experience, for example of the IMF, makes a convincing case that the discipline imposed by supranational bodies can make it easier to frame the debate on reforms at the national level. In particular, the debate can be framed not in terms of whether, but in terms of how reform needs to take place.In other words, I am not convinced by the argument that, in terms of structural reforms, there is an opposition between rules and ownership. On the contrary, they can be mutually reinforcing.In conclusion, there is a strong case for us to apply the same principles to the governance of structural reforms as we do to fiscal governance. The essential cohesion of the Union depends on it. With the benefit of hindsight, it would have been useful to establish, alongside the existing convergence criteria, a set of structural criteria that had to be met to enter the euro area, and then respected once inside. But we have to start from where we are. Thus, I would see merits in initiating, as a one-off, a new convergence process within the euro area – one which ensures that all countries are truly in a position to benefit from membership, and that none cause harm to another.Today, national governments are not able to fully exercise their sovereignty alone, whether sovereignty is defined normatively, à la Jean Bodin, in terms of inalienable rights, such as to declare war and treat the conditions of the peace, to judge in last resort, to raise taxes and to mint money; or whether it is defined positively, à la John Locke, in terms of a fiduciary power to act for certain ends.Individually, national governments are simply not powerful enough. To serve their purpose, they have to learn to govern together; they have to learn to be sovereign together so as to respond to their citizens’ needs. Those needs today are growth and job creation.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",summaryth govern structur reform deserv much attent enforc fiscal rule done euro area level ecb presid mario draghi said speech london wednesday structur reform need strong domest ownership sinc reach deepli societ arrang time exampl intern monetari fund show convinc case made supran bodi make easier frame nation debat reform shift debat whether implement reform mr draghi argu outcom structur reform higher level product competit mere countri interest interest monetari union whole euro area therefor case establish rule structur reform eulevel lack reform threaten cohes union recoveri show us decis reform strengthen ladi gentlemen belief interest peopl cannot safeguard pure nation author requir establish supran institut constant motiv life work tommaso padoaschioppa also belief motiv involv tommaso work develop global account standard countri speak account languag today wherea decad ago major economi use intern financi report standard ifr trust momentum kept particular european policymak progress swift adopt ifr tommaso padoaschioppa deeproot convict found pronounc express constant support european integr semin contribut creation euro end recent press confer said crisi would sever less integr europ futur lie integr renationalis economi suspect tommaso would agre sovereignti european union normat concept link right state also posit concept sovereign cannot effect deliv expect citizen sovereign name genuin sovereignti exist policymak effect notion efficaci public power reflect principl subsidiar embed eu treati known federalist principl unit state logic eleg captur lock power given trust attain end whenev end manifest neglect power must devolv hand gave may place anew shall think best safeti secur european integr effect process progress appli principl govern pool sovereignti everi time prove necessari could continu deliv duti toward peopl start process object prevent continent war two world war demonstr inabl european govern act alon provid physic secur citizen thus establish common institut coal steel author could guarante peac effect parallel quit independ polici action econom integr also progress gradual also continu process integr result inde least much technolog develop improv transport communic polici choic larg part inescap creat farreach interdepend requir govern respond proactiv choos pool sovereignti regain control economi establish singl market particular pace reach integr acceler mark cours purpos remain signific success achiev european union free market assum freedom take part also assum mean protect freedom refer protect properti right enforc contract condit fair competit avoid moral hazard econom integr therefor requir integr econom polici euro emerg fact corollari singl market conceiv earli late respons cost associ exchang rate friction within singl market begin agricultur product alreadi influenti studi commiss leagu nation great economist ragnar nurks warn convinc econom loss result currenc volatil tommaso later argu inconsist quartet free trade free capit movement fix exchang rate independ monetari polici ultim incompat euro consequ identifi earli particular respect fiscal govern fulli acknowledg later pervas effect macroeconom imbal case crisi show cohes union fact reli behaviour member believ case communitylevel govern appli fiscal polici bank union also structur reform endeavour explain case fiscal govern communiti level well understood stem negat extern unsound public financ member state generat neighbour crisi valid concern reinforc show extern could even pervas initi thought fiscal sound govern obvious first foremost interest countri countri excess stretch public financ lose abil use fiscal polici countercycl stabilis tool inde abil reli govern abl access market favour condit time need trough cycl seen crisi cannot taken grant doubt aris sustain debt would problemat anywher monetari union common monetari polici aim price stabil euro area whole cannot cater specif asymmetr shock absenc feder budget like see unit state sound govern credit everywher paramount import counteract region slump govern retain abil stabilis economi other becom plausibl econom diverg occur one channel cohes union affect abil depend keep debt low budget deficit close zero output grow potenti flexibl exist rule keep one hous order also benefit help mitig effect contagion seen crisi govern robust fiscal posit much less affect contagion extrem even benefit safehaven status protect howev absolut reli abil market discrimin sound unsound debtor yet bubbl panic happen bubbl situat market ignor fundament even debtor unsound long market fail rais fund cost countri unsustain polici panic situat market also ignor fundament time detriment sound debtor fact main channel contagion within monetari union direct exposur one countri anoth fact preced set one countri seen replic elsewher affect condit market access put differ main channel financi contagion asset side balanc sheet liabil side perhap saw effect clear fragment bank sector three year ago fear one countri could leav euro result countri cut financi fragment everywher fragment creat consider damag renationalis financ hinder homogen transmiss monetari polici across border result diverg financi condit across euro area initi econom diverg process turn could challeng sustain euro area ecb therefor act creation outright monetari transact omt programm nip bud unwarr fear euro area breakup prevent advers equilibrium becom entrench propheci much fals selffulfil necessari protect monetari transmiss process necessari protect price stabil essenti cohes union threat price stabil today come unfound fear breakup euro consequ chang factor energi food price relat price adjust stress countri exchang rate behaviour weak demand high unemploy nonetheless threat real cope govern council determin keep monetari polici stanc accommod extend period time moreov govern council unanim commit also use unconvent instrument within mandat becom necessari address risk prolong period low inflat strong determin safeguard firm anchor inflat expect medium long term lesson draw fragment experienc cohes union fundament interest member call question experienc firsthand consequ cannot anticip total certainti detriment therefor consider relev import europ alreadi made extens progress strengthen rule exampl fiscal compact essenti rule enforc unwind consolid achiev divest rule credibl would selfdef countri three reason first high level indebted almost euro area countri impli higher vulner market pressur contagion euro area face econom financi shock higher level debt greater probabl fall bad equilibrium high rate lead default second fiscal rule appli nation govern achiev stabil also sustain growth view clash nation ownership budget fiscal rule view nation debat promot growthfriend fiscal consolid simpli pain account exercis third respect rule matter prerequisit form integr demonstr willing fulfil commit member state achiev degre mutual trust prerequisit integr area inde pool sovereignti requir great amount mutual confid particular fiscal area tradit seen prerog nation parliament reason appli fiscal framework larg extent extend area econom polici particular think case form common govern structur reform outcom structur reform continu high level product competit mere countri interest interest union whole singl market singl currenc conceiv sort ricardian union mean union countri sector firm exploit compar advantag think disagr singl market success enough cohes union singl market singl currenc constitut positivesum game sens exist rais aggreg welfar cohes euro area reli fact paretoimprov must case countri better insid union would outsid obvious enough true moment join true continu mani instanc around world polit union whose cohes maintain weaker region state benefit recurr fiscal transfer peer typic oper central budget possibl weaker region maintain recurr extern deficit stronger region post perman surplus case unit state instanc also true within individu countri europ euro area howev cohes fund catchingup countri privat credit flow financ temporari imbal perman fiscal transfer member state envisag medium term economi stand feet product competit enough benefit opportun afford singl market done much reduc imbal generat factor lack competit structur weak extern imbal decreas sinc announc omt persist imbal howev could eventu undermin econom polit cohes union alreadi discuss threat cohes sustain union pervas effect form contagion uncertainti weigh invest structur reform play crucial role perhap even import role euro area union market open eu legisl structur reform firm individu enabl take full advantag open inde intent singl market free individu firm within market distinct would made account nation place establish competit polici enforc eu level firm protect nation token firm individu penalis countri resid yet firm face differ oper environ across euro area prevent exploit advantag market exampl world econom forum rank finland third world term global competit wherea greec rank st world bank rank ireland th world term eas busi wherea malta rank rd persist differ creat risk perman imbal mind believ structur reform countri enough common interest justifi made subject disciplin communiti level see two reason approach could favour nation govern today first past year seen risk associ insuffici competit member state benefit structur reform wit accumul extern imbal peripher economi prior crisi left vulner sudden stop dynam recent seen improv taken place govern implement reform chang current account posit stress countri rang almost percentag point correct gdp spain percentag point improv gdp greec part explain lower import context recess fact return market confid euro area result main acknowledg individu govern particular stress countri taken signific correct action continu need lack reform threaten cohes union alreadi see decis reform strengthen begin final judgment rest abl show cohes also produc growth job second reason stronger role union could benefici similar fiscal polici establish rule level union may fact help nation author implement reform structur reform reach deep enough societ arrang practic succeed made object strong domest ownership time reform requir substanti polit capit histor experi exampl imf make convinc case disciplin impos supran bodi make easier frame debat reform nation level particular debat frame term whether term reform need take place word convinc argument term structur reform opposit rule ownership contrari mutual reinforc conclus strong case us appli principl govern structur reform fiscal govern essenti cohes union depend benefit hindsight would use establish alongsid exist converg criteria set structur criteria met enter euro area respect insid start thus would see merit initi oneoff new converg process within euro area one ensur countri truli posit benefit membership none caus harm anoth today nation govern abl fulli exercis sovereignti alon whether sovereignti defin normat à la jean bodin term inalien right declar war treat condit peac judg last resort rais tax mint money whether defin posit à la lock term fiduciari power act certain end individu nation govern simpli power enough serv purpos learn govern togeth learn sovereign togeth respond citizen need need today growth job creation reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en