Benoît Cœuré: Lessons from East Asia for the euro area,28-10-2013,European Central Bank,ECB,3181,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen, [1]The global economic and financial crisis confronted the world economy not only with financial turbulence, loss in output and social distress on a scale not seen since the Great Depression. It also created a series of challenges for policy- makers. Across the euro area, it exposed structural and institutional weaknesses that had remained hidden during the preceding era, the “Great Moderation”. Times of crisis are times of hardship – but they are also times of change and opportunity. This seems particularly true for Europe, where progress has often come in this way.The Second World War was the impetus for the European Coal and Steel Community, which was established to prevent another war between France and Germany. It formed the nucleus of today’s European Union. The demise of the Bretton Woods system in the 1970s was the catalyst for a European single currency, which was eventually introduced in 1999. I’ll be talking today about the effects of the present crisis and the various challenges it has presented for the euro area. I’ll compare it with the East Asian crisis of 1997. In my view, there are similarities that yield useful policy lessons for the euro area. But there are also differences that need to be kept in mind.What are the parallels between the Asian crisis in 1997-1998 and the euro area crisis?The economies of emerging Asia were characterised by buoyant growth and a brisk expansion of credit (see Chart 1). This rise in debt was facilitated by considerable inflows of foreign capital, which financed significant external deficits (see Chart 2). This led to growing financial imbalances, and in particular to currency and maturity mismatches on the balance sheets of local banks. In addition, the economic boom prevailing at that time was accompanied by a loss of competitiveness of the region’s export sector. Investors typically under-priced potential risks as they had overly optimistic expectations of the medium-term growth prospects. They did not identify systemic vulnerabilities such as the risk of sudden stops in capital flows or of twin crises of the banking system and the balance of payments, which eventually materialised. [2] Except for currency mismatches, similar developments were evident in the euro area before 2009 – if not at the regional level, at least in those countries that later ran into financial difficulties. It was widely believed that sudden stops in capital flows, not to mention twin banking and balance of payments crises, could not happen in advanced economies. [3] And yet this is exactly what happened in Europe ten years after the Asian crisis (see Chart 2). It seems therefore useful to look also at East Asia’s response to its crisis and see what lessons can be learned.Given the financial nature of the Asian crisis, this was a key element in resolving it. Non-viable financial institutions were closed, viable institutions recapitalised and strengthened, value-impaired assets dealt with and the corporate sector restructured, including through foreign investment. [4] These measures were implemented decisively. They were associated with a painful adjustment process in the crisis countries but, at the same time, they made a swift recovery possible.This experience contrasts with Japan’s experience in the late 1980s. Following the bursting of Japan’s asset bubble, there was by and large no rapid write-down of non-performing assets. Due to the low profitability of banks, it was believed that an immediate write-off of bad loans would prevent compliance with capital requirements. The recognition of losses was postponed and, as a consequence, capital continued to be allocated to investments with limited positive impact on Japan’s long-term growth potential, which some have called “zombie lending” [5]. Ultimately, this resulted in Japan’s “lost decade”, namely an extended period of anaemic growth (see Chart 3).Early in the crisis, emerging Asian economies strengthened prudential regulation and supervision, together with bank governance and market transparency and discipline, in order to prevent further instability and bring domestic standards closer to the international norms. [6]Furthermore, they generally acknowledged that their economic “miracle” before the crisis was not sustainable. It was driven by over-investment encouraged by Colbertist policies, implicit government guarantees, and too often, opaqueness and political interference in market mechanisms [7]. As a result, at the macro level, growth was led by capital accumulation in the wrong sectors and not by a rise in total factor productivity. In Paul Krugman’s words, the Asian miracle was “the fruit of perspiration, not of inspiration” [8]. To address the root causes of the crisis, structural reforms aimed at improving governance and challenging vested interests, both in public policy-making and in the corporate sector, were essential. [9] The lesson to be learnt was that sustainable growth can only be achieved by fostering an environment that encourages open markets, innovation and entrepreneurship.Indeed, there is empirical evidence that more open economies recover faster from the output contraction that usually accompanies a sudden stop of capital. [10] As such, the most open Asian economies, such as Hong Kong and Singapore, were among the least severely affected and fastest to recover from the Asian crisis. [11] In other words, despite the attendant risks, globalisation in trade is still the best way to achieve progress and economic development, and open financial markets can support it provided they are backed by strong prudential supervision. Open trade policies in the crisis helped Asian economies to benefit from the upswing in global trade and growth towards the turn of the millennium (see Chart 4), which in turn supported the post-crisis recovery. Emerging Asian economies had greater policy leeway than euro area countries in dealing with their crises, in that they had flexible exchange rate regimes. Some might argue that this makes it hard to say which part of the Asian experience is relevant for Europe. But I would have a different interpretation: a lack of nominal exchange rate flexibility does not preclude real exchange rate adjustment. Sharing a currency entails a fundamental trade-off. It brings considerable microeconomic benefits but it creates responsibilities for participating countries. They should run prudent policies to make asymmetric shocks less frequent, ensure that relative prices can adjust if such a shock nevertheless occurs, and be prepared to insure each other against extreme outcomes when the former mechanisms are not enough.The conditions were unfortunately not met in the euro area. National policies were run on the misguided assumption that countries, companies and households could borrow forever. In spite of needing more flexible markets with its single currency, Europe faced stronger nominal rigidities than East Asia in labour and product markets. [12] This limited the ability of euro area countries to adjust to asymmetric shocks, especially as cross-border labour mobility was low and public debt levels were already high. And finally, no mutual insurance mechanism was in place.But, and here comes the good news, unlike emerging Asia in the late 1990s, Europe had a well-established regional political framework to address its crisis. The framework of integration and cooperation among EU members is old and dense, building on the experience gained with the European Monetary System [13]. This made it possible to create the necessary instruments (the EFSF and ESM) for financial support for domestic adjustment programmes to come mainly from within the Union, with the IMF focusing on monitoring conditionality.Some will remember the IMF Annual Meetings in 1997 in Hong Kong, when calls to create an “Asian Monetary Fund” were judged incompatible with the IMF’s universal mandate. [14] Contrary to Asia in the late 1990s, Europe had the political infrastructure in place to sustain the sharing of sovereignty that makes mutual insurance mechanisms possible. This is not to say that all the discussions were easy, far from it, as might be expected in times of crisis. Europe’s sense of commonality was, and still is, under severe strain. But the political framework was there to produce decisions, and most importantly, a legal framework was also there to implement them.The lesson from this is that regional integration, regional rule of law, and the sense of a common project are sources of stability. [15] In East Asia, things have moved on since the late 1990s, with the Chiang Mai Initiative multilateralisation. The G20 has taken stock of the Asian and European experiences and acknowledged the relevance of regional financial arrangements.Based on the lessons learnt from the Asian crisis, what are the main challenges we face in the euro area? Let me consider them one by one.To begin with, we need to reform Europe’s financial sector.We have, so to speak, come to a crossroads in Europe. In one direction lies the Japanese experience, and in the other direction that of emerging East Asia. The authorities can either choose between swiftly auditing and repairing the banking sector, which will help to restore credit flows, or they can allow forbearance, which will harm the long-term prospects for our economy.I do not mean to downplay the significant restructuring and recapitalisation that has already taken place in Europe. Since the onset of the global financial crisis, euro area banks have raised around €225 billion of fresh capital and a further €275 billion has been injected by governments, equivalent in total to more than 5% of euro area GDP. Today, the median Core Tier 1 capital ratio of the largest euro area banks stands close to 12%. But there is some way to go. To ensure that we take the right road, I see three responses as key.The first is to carry out a comprehensive clean-up of the banking system so that the price mechanism is no longer obscured by uncertainty about asset valuation and bank funding models, and banks can free up balance sheet capacity to extend new loans. The ECB will take up its supervisory responsibilities in about a year from now, and as part of this we will conduct a comprehensive assessment of 128 significant credit institutions covering 85% of euro area bank assets. We announced the details of this exercise on Wednesday last week. [16] It aims to increase transparency, to identify the necessary corrective actions and to build confidence in the banking system. With such steps, and provided that sources of capital are clearly identified, including public backstops when private sources have been exhausted, I firmly believe we can put the banking system on a sounder footing and enable it to support the economy’s recovery.The second response is to reduce financial fragmentation. Despite having a single market for capital in Europe, liquidity is not fully fungible between and even within cross-border banks. This means that liquidity usage is not optimised – surpluses in some countries are not used to fund deficits in others. The result is a greater divergence in bank funding costs and lending rates than would be warranted by the underlying economic fundamentals, and euro area companies being unable to tap a single pool of savings to fund their development.The third response is to explore avenues for non-bank financing – that is, to develop debt and equity capital markets in Europe. Around 75% of firms’ external financing in the euro area comes from banks, which makes the economy particularly vulnerable to crises that spread through the banking system. Measures are being introduced in Europe to develop capital markets for long-term financing and deepen markets for the securitisation of loans to small and medium-sized enterprises [17].However, having a well-functioning financial sector is only one part of the story. To leave the crisis behind us, we also have to ask: what in fact does that sector finance? Again, we can learn from the Asian crisis: we need to foster growth and total factor productivity with new business models.Due to its length and severity, the economic downturn has already caused a permanent loss in output and a rise in structural unemployment, and we cannot rule out that the growth rate of potential output has been affected too. To repair this damage, investment in both physical and human capital has to be a key component of the recovery. Clearly, there is spare capacity in the euro area economy. Total investment in the euro area is currently 17% lower than it was in 2007. But some of this capacity is in sectors which will not be future engines of growth – such as commercial real estate in some of the stressed countries. What we need is investment in new business models that will raise total factor productivity and provide the sources of future growth.Politicians are not the best placed to decide what these business models will be. The market economy will take care of that. The important thing is that we create an environment that encourages innovation and entrepreneurship so that new models can emerge, and capital and labour can be reallocated to a more efficient use. This is in the best interests of the people of Europe, both as workers and as savers, beginning with those who have been hit hardest by the crisis. It nevertheless implies changes at both national and European levels.At national level, we need to prioritise public spending towards productivity-enhancing investment, ensure that labour and goods market are flexible, cultivate a supportive regulatory, judicial and educational environment, and open our economies to spur competition and encourage the emergence of new actors. Opaqueness and vested interests [18] are not only defining features of developing economies. Successful reform in European economies hinges on efforts to curb rent-seeking behaviours. For example, doesn’t the Single Supervisory Mechanism have the objective of freeing bank supervision from national politics?At European level, we need to provide a framework that supports and incentivises the introduction of such national policies. This is the role of economic union in the euro area, the “E” of EMU. I would stress, however, that economic union does not mean defining a single economic model across all countries. On the contrary, its purpose is to create the conditions for each country to identify and develop its comparative advantage. Paradoxically, it is only by encouraging difference – comparative advantage – that the euro area can achieve convergence – that is, a more even distribution of economic outcomes.Let me finally address the third lesson learnt from East Asia. Europe needs to avoid protectionist temptations and calls for re-nationalisation. Protectionism and beggar-thy-neighbour policies would lead to further losses of welfare at both European and global level.Fortunately, there has been no significant surge in barriers to global trade in recent years – unlike during the Great Depression – thanks to global and regional policy coordination. These efforts remain important. Barriers to trade in goods and services cannot be raised within Europe thanks to our Single Market and competition rules which are enshrined in European laws, but the Single Market can be further enhanced. Savings have been partly re-nationalised as a consequence of financial fragmentation. This is a trend that, if left unchecked, can be fatal to the Single Market. Completing the Banking Union is key to halt it, and I welcome EU leaders’ resolve to swiftly agree on a Single Resolution Mechanism. Finally, Europe should remain open to the world. Further progress on bilateral or regional free trade agreements, and cooperation in implementing the new financial regulatory standards, are the best signal in this respect.Let me draw to a close by re-emphasising that crises, despite their negative consequences, can have positive effects. They can galvanise efforts and focus minds. They can drive change and bring about progress. They can pave the way for innovative solutions. But to secure these gains, cooperation across national borders is crucial, in other words, there must be a willingness to work towards common goals and to learn from each other and resist protectionism. This spirit will be essential to tackle the challenges still ahead of us, not only in the euro area but also at a global level.It is often claimed that the Chinese and Japanese word for crisis, wēijī or kiki (危机 or 危機), is made of the two characters meaning “danger” and “opportunity”. While there can be no doubt that wēi means “danger”, I would rather understand jī as meaning the critical moment when things have to change – the ancient Greeks’ kairos. This critical moment has now arrived for Europe. Europe has emerged from the danger zone. It’s time for us to get our act together, to reform, and to grow.Thank you very much for your attention.Sources: IMF WEO and Haver AnalyticsSources: IMF WEO and Haver AnalyticsSource: Haver AnalyticsSources: IMF WEO and Haver Analytics[1]I would like to thank Ine Van Robays for her contribution. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.[2]See Calvo, G. (1998).   “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden Stops”, Journal of Applied Economics 1(1), pp. 35-54, and Kaminsky, G. and C. Reinhart (1999). “The Twin Crises: Causes of Banking and Balance-of-Payments Problems”, American Economic Review, 89, pp. 473-500. A well known example of complacency about East Asian growth is the 1993 World Bank report on “The East Asian Miracle”.[3]See FRBSF Economic Letter (2011). “Could We Have Learned from the Asian Financial Crisis of 1997-98?”, February 2011.[4]See Lindgren, C.-J. et al. (1999). “Financial Sector Crisis and Restructuring. Lessons from Asia”, IMF Occasional Paper, 188.[5]See Fukao, M. (2003). “Japan’s Lost Decade and its Financial System”, The World Economy, 26, pp. 365-384, and Caballero, R., T. Hoshi and A. Kashyap (2008). “Zombie Lending and Depressed Restructuring in Japan”, American Economic Review, 98:5, pp. 1943-1977.[6]See footnote 4.[7]See Krugman, P. (1999). “What happened to Asia?”, in Sato R. et al., Global Competition and Integration, Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 315-327. Already in 1590 Hong Zicheng’s Càigēntán claimed that “water that is clear has no fish.”[8]See Krugman, P. (1994). “The Myth of Asia’s Miracle”, Foreign Affairs, 73:6 (1994: November/December).[9]See Kochpar, K., P. Loungani and M. Stone (1998): “The East Asian Crisis: Macroeconomic Developments and Policy Lessons”, IMF Working Paper 98/128.[10]See Cavallo E.A. and J. A. Frankel (2008). “Does Openness to Trade Make Countries More Vulnerable to Sudden Stops, Or Less? Using Gravity to Establish Causality”, Journal of International Money and Finance, Volume 27, Issue 8, pp. 1430–1452.[11]See Loong, L.S. (2000). “Post crisis Asia – The way forward”, BIS William Taylor Memorial Lecture, 21 September 2000.[12]See Heinz, F.F. and D. Rusinova (2011): “How flexible are real wages in EU countries? A Panel Investigation”, ECB Working Paper No 1360. [13]See James, H. (2012):”Making European Monetary Union”, The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.[14]See Sakakibara, E., 2000, Nihon to Sekai ga Furueta Hi, Chuo Koron Shinsha. [15]“G20 Principles for Cooperation between the IMF and Regional Financing Arrangements as endorsed by G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors”, 15 October 2011.[16]The comprehensive assessment entails three broad elements. First, a supervisory risk assessment to review key risks including liquidity and funding. Second, a balance sheet assessment to enhance transparency in banks’ balance sheets and their asset quality, collateral valuation and provisions, and so on. And third, a stress test to examine banks’ resilience to adverse scenarios. See European Central Bank (2013). “ECB starts comprehensive assessment in advance of supervisory role”, 23 October.[17]See European Commission (2013). Long term financing of the European economy, Green Paper, March.[18]I refer here to the concept of “limited access social orders”, see North, D., J. Wallis and B. Weingast (2009). Violence and Social Orders: A Conceptual Framework for Interpreting Recorded Human History, Cambridge University Press.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen global econom financi crisi confront world economi financi turbul loss output social distress scale seen sinc great depress also creat seri challeng polici maker across euro area expos structur institut weak remain hidden preced era great moder time crisi time hardship also time chang opportun seem particular true europ progress often come way second world war impetus european coal steel communiti establish prevent anoth war franc germani form nucleus today european union demis bretton wood system catalyst european singl currenc eventu introduc ll talk today effect present crisi various challeng present euro area ll compar east asian crisi view similar yield use polici lesson euro area also differ need kept mind parallel asian crisi euro area crisi economi emerg asia characteris buoyant growth brisk expans credit see chart rise debt facilit consider inflow foreign capit financ signific extern deficit see chart led grow financi imbal particular currenc matur mismatch balanc sheet local bank addit econom boom prevail time accompani loss competit region export sector investor typic underpr potenti risk over optimist expect mediumterm growth prospect identifi system vulner risk sudden stop capit flow twin crise bank system balanc payment eventu materialis except currenc mismatch similar develop evid euro area region level least countri later ran financi difficulti wide believ sudden stop capit flow mention twin bank balanc payment crise could happen advanc economi yet exact happen europ ten year asian crisi see chart seem therefor use look also east asia respons crisi see lesson learn given financi natur asian crisi key element resolv nonviabl financi institut close viabl institut recapitalis strengthen valueimpair asset dealt corpor sector restructur includ foreign invest measur implement decis associ pain adjust process crisi countri time made swift recoveri possibl experi contrast japan experi late follow burst japan asset bubbl larg rapid writedown nonperform asset due low profit bank believ immedi writeoff bad loan would prevent complianc capit requir recognit loss postpon consequ capit continu alloc invest limit posit impact japan longterm growth potenti call zombi lend ultim result japan lost decad name extend period anaem growth see chart earli crisi emerg asian economi strengthen prudenti regul supervis togeth bank govern market transpar disciplin order prevent instabl bring domest standard closer intern norm furthermor general acknowledg econom miracl crisi sustain driven overinvest encourag colbertist polici implicit govern guarante often opaqu polit interfer market mechan result macro level growth led capit accumul wrong sector rise total factor product paul krugman word asian miracl fruit perspir inspir address root caus crisi structur reform aim improv govern challeng vest interest public policymak corpor sector essenti lesson learnt sustain growth achiev foster environ encourag open market innov entrepreneurship inde empir evid open economi recov faster output contract usual accompani sudden stop capit open asian economi hong kong singapor among least sever affect fastest recov asian crisi word despit attend risk globalis trade still best way achiev progress econom develop open financi market support provid back strong prudenti supervis open trade polici crisi help asian economi benefit upsw global trade growth toward turn millennium see chart turn support postcrisi recoveri emerg asian economi greater polici leeway euro area countri deal crise flexibl exchang rate regim might argu make hard say part asian experi relev europ would differ interpret lack nomin exchang rate flexibl preclud real exchang rate adjust share currenc entail fundament tradeoff bring consider microeconom benefit creat respons particip countri run prudent polici make asymmetr shock less frequent ensur relat price adjust shock nevertheless occur prepar insur extrem outcom former mechan enough condit unfortun met euro area nation polici run misguid assumpt countri compani household could borrow forev spite need flexibl market singl currenc europ face stronger nomin rigid east asia labour product market limit abil euro area countri adjust asymmetr shock especi crossbord labour mobil low public debt level alreadi high final mutual insur mechan place come good news unlik emerg asia late europ wellestablish region polit framework address crisi framework integr cooper among eu member old dens build experi gain european monetari system made possibl creat necessari instrument efsf esm financi support domest adjust programm come main within union imf focus monitor condit rememb imf annual meet hong kong call creat asian monetari fund judg incompat imf univers mandat contrari asia late europ polit infrastructur place sustain share sovereignti make mutual insur mechan possibl say discuss easi far might expect time crisi europ sens common still sever strain polit framework produc decis import legal framework also implement lesson region integr region rule law sens common project sourc stabil east asia thing move sinc late chiang mai initi multilateralis g taken stock asian european experi acknowledg relev region financi arrang base lesson learnt asian crisi main challeng face euro area let consid one one begin need reform europ financi sector speak come crossroad europ one direct lie japanes experi direct emerg east asia author either choos swift audit repair bank sector help restor credit flow allow forbear harm longterm prospect economi mean downplay signific restructur recapitalis alreadi taken place europ sinc onset global financi crisi euro area bank rais around billion fresh capit billion inject govern equival total euro area gdp today median core tier capit ratio largest euro area bank stand close way go ensur take right road see three respons key first carri comprehens cleanup bank system price mechan longer obscur uncertainti asset valuat bank fund model bank free balanc sheet capac extend new loan ecb take supervisori respons year part conduct comprehens assess signific credit institut cover euro area bank asset announc detail exercis wednesday last week aim increas transpar identifi necessari correct action build confid bank system step provid sourc capit clear identifi includ public backstop privat sourc exhaust firm believ put bank system sounder foot enabl support economi recoveri second respons reduc financi fragment despit singl market capit europ liquid fulli fungibl even within crossbord bank mean liquid usag optimis surplus countri use fund deficit other result greater diverg bank fund cost lend rate would warrant under econom fundament euro area compani unabl tap singl pool save fund develop third respons explor avenu nonbank financ develop debt equiti capit market europ around firm extern financ euro area come bank make economi particular vulner crise spread bank system measur introduc europ develop capit market longterm financ deepen market securitis loan small mediums enterpris howev wellfunct financi sector one part stori leav crisi behind us also ask fact sector financ learn asian crisi need foster growth total factor product new busi model due length sever econom downturn alreadi caus perman loss output rise structur unemploy cannot rule growth rate potenti output affect repair damag invest physic human capit key compon recoveri clear spare capac euro area economi total invest euro area current lower capac sector futur engin growth commerci real estat stress countri need invest new busi model rais total factor product provid sourc futur growth politician best place decid busi model market economi take care import thing creat environ encourag innov entrepreneurship new model emerg capit labour realloc effici use best interest peopl europ worker saver begin hit hardest crisi nevertheless impli chang nation european level nation level need prioritis public spend toward productivityenhanc invest ensur labour good market flexibl cultiv support regulatori judici educ environ open economi spur competit encourag emerg new actor opaqu vest interest defin featur develop economi success reform european economi hing effort curb rentseek behaviour exampl doesn singl supervisori mechan object free bank supervis nation polit european level need provid framework support incentivis introduct nation polici role econom union euro area e emu would stress howev econom union mean defin singl econom model across countri contrari purpos creat condit countri identifi develop compar advantag paradox encourag differ compar advantag euro area achiev converg even distribut econom outcom let final address third lesson learnt east asia europ need avoid protectionist temptat call renationalis protection beggarthyneighbour polici would lead loss welfar european global level fortun signific surg barrier global trade recent year unlik great depress thank global region polici coordin effort remain import barrier trade good servic cannot rais within europ thank singl market competit rule enshrin european law singl market enhanc save part renationalis consequ financi fragment trend left uncheck fatal singl market complet bank union key halt welcom eu leader resolv swift agre singl resolut mechan final europ remain open world progress bilater region free trade agreement cooper implement new financi regulatori standard best signal respect let draw close reemphasis crise despit negat consequ posit effect galvanis effort focus mind drive chang bring progress pave way innov solut secur gain cooper across nation border crucial word must willing work toward common goal learn resist protection spirit essenti tackl challeng still ahead us euro area also global level often claim chines japanes word crisi wēijī kiki 危机 危機 made two charact mean danger opportun doubt wēi mean danger would rather understand jī mean critic moment thing chang ancient greek kairo critic moment arriv europ europ emerg danger zone time us get act togeth reform grow thank much attent sourc imf weo haver analyticssourc imf weo haver analyticssourc haver analyticssourc imf weo haver analyt would like thank ine van robay contribut remain sole respons opinion contain herein see calvo g capit flow capitalmarket crise simpl econom sudden stop journal appli econom pp kaminski g c reinhart twin crise caus bank balanceofpay problem american econom review pp well known exampl complac east asian growth world bank report east asian miracl see frbsf econom letter could learn asian financi crisi februari see lindgren c j et al financi sector crisi restructur lesson asia imf occasion paper see fukao m japan lost decad financi system world economi pp caballero r hoshi kashyap zombi lend depress restructur japan american econom review pp see footnot see krugman p happen asia sato r et al global competit integr kluwer academ publish pp alreadi hong zicheng càigēntán claim water clear fish see krugman p myth asia miracl foreign affair novemberdecemb see kochpar k p loungani m stone east asian crisi macroeconom develop polici lesson imf work paper see cavallo e j frankel open trade make countri vulner sudden stop less use graviti establish causal journal intern money financ volum issu pp see loong l post crisi asia way forward bis william taylor memori lectur septemb see heinz f f d rusinova flexibl real wage eu countri panel investig ecb work paper see jame h make european monetari union belknap press harvard univers press see sakakibara e nihon sekai ga furueta hi chuo koron shinsha g principl cooper imf region financ arrang endors g financ minist central bank governor octob comprehens assess entail three broad element first supervisori risk assess review key risk includ liquid fund second balanc sheet assess enhanc transpar bank balanc sheet asset qualiti collater valuat provis third stress test examin bank resili advers scenario see european central bank ecb start comprehens assess advanc supervisori role octob see european commiss long term financ european economi green paper march refer concept limit access social order see north d j walli b weingast violenc social order conceptu framework interpret record human histori cambridg univers press reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en