Jörg Asmussen: The public and the private banking union,08-11-2013,European Central Bank,ECB,3619,"<p>Dear Mr Aehling [Veranstalter]Dear colleagues,Ladies and gentlemen,The timing of today’s conference on “The Single Resolution Mechanism and the Limits of Bank-Regulation” could not have been better chosen as the SRM is the dominating theme in all European fora at the moment.Thank you for inviting me and I am happy to share a view on banking union from the European Central Bank with you. Looking back with the experience of the crisis, I think that many here today share the assessment that the key problem in the past was that there was too little cooperation and too much diversity – we lacked a coherent European approach to financial sector policies. But there is clearly scope for more cooperation today as, particularly after the experience of the crisis, preferences are more aligned in Europe. We all want banks that are well supervised and that can be resolved at minimum cost to the taxpayer.To achieve this, I think we need not reinvent the wheel. There are elements of the US approach that have worked and that we can usefully borrow in Europe. Saying this, one has to acknowledge, of course, that the US is a fully integrated federal state whereas the European Union will remain a construction sui generis for the foreseeable future. Therefore, the US approach cannot serve as a blueprint for Europe, but its direction may prove right for Europe as well.The elements of the US approach fall into two basic categories: first, what I call the US’s ‘public banking union’ – its federal institutions for dealing with banking crises. Second, what I dub its ‘private banking union’– its integrated financial market that dissipates the costs of crises.Clearly, the key difference between Europe and the US is that banking problems in the US have been mainly taken care of at the federal level, whereas in Europe responsibility for troubled banking has thus far remained national. During the crisis in the US, it was federal institutions that stepped into the breach. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) resolved 490 unviable banks, using resources from its deposit insurance fund financed by all the banks. The US Treasury provided recapitalisation support and guarantees through its Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). The Federal Reserve undertook a thorough stress-test, determining banks’ additional capital needs. To understand the situation we are in in Europe, it is useful to make a thought-experiment, and imagine that no such federal institutions exist in the US. Imagine that the state of California would have had to come up with the TARP money for Wells Fargo instead of the US Treasury. Imagine that the state of New York would have had to provide the guarantees to Citigroup. Think about how the markets, how would the rating agencies have treated these states? And how they would have treated these banks? The lesson for the euro area is clear: federal institutions can prevent local crises from becoming systemic.In Europe, we do not yet have these federal institutions that can act as shock absorbers. So far, responsibility for dealing with bank problems lies exclusively with the individual EU countries. The result is that – to quote an FT editorial – “national taxpayers subsidise banks implicitly in good times, explicitly in bad times, and suicidally in a sovereign debt crisis”.Indeed, the crisis in Ireland has shown that problems in domestic banks can overwhelm the fiscal capacity of national sovereigns. The causality can also be the other way around, as the case of Greece has shown, where fiscal problems have dragged down the banking system. These countries got caught in a vicious fiscal-financial feedback loop, which in the end also drags down the economy, breaks up the internal market, and impairs our monetary policy conduct. Removing this vicious feedback loop is what Banking Union is all about. Creating a banking union will be good for the euro, good for the internal market, and good for the recovery. It will be good for the euro, because it will help to repair our monetary policy transmission mechanism. In other words, it will ensure that the ECB’s low interest rates will be effectively passed on to those countries that probably need them most. It will be good for the internal market, because it will be of help to reverse the significant financial fragmentation that we have seen so far. And it will be good for the recovery, as banks will be put on a stronger footing, confidence will be improved, and ultimately credit will start to flow again to enterprises on affordable terms. But what are the necessary elements of a banking union? To our mind, two elements are indispensable: a Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) and a Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM).Furthermore, it is important to have a single rulebook and the implementation of the Capital Requirements Directive and Regulation IV is key in this respect. A single European deposit insurance is not top on the regulatory agenda today and it may be tackled in the long term only. In fact, the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) and its liability cascade makes it clear that deposits will come in only at the very end in bank resolution and thus the need for a single deposit insurance scheme is less urgent and a better harmonisation could suffice at present. Let me start with the Single Supervisory Mechanism. The ECB has been asked to assume responsibility for this mechanism, and to mould the existing national supervisory authorities into an effective and efficient federal supervisory team. We are making good progress on this front, and the SSM should become fully operational in the last quarter of 2014. Before we take on this task, we want to get an adequate view of what we will be supervising. In the coming months, the ECB will therefore undertake a balance sheet assessment. The importance of this exercise cannot be overestimated. This comprehensive exercise will encompass three steps:First, a supervisory risk assessment to review, quantitatively and qualitatively, key risks, including liquidity, leverage and funding.Second, an asset quality review (AQR) to enhance the transparency of bank exposures by reviewing the quality of banks’ assets, including the adequacy of asset and collateral valuation and related provisions.Third, a stress test to examine the resilience of banks’ balance sheet to stress scenarios.These three elements are closely interlinked.The comprehensive assessment will conclude with an aggregate disclosure of the outcomes, at country and bank level, together with any recommendations for supervisory measures. This comprehensive outcome will be published prior to the ECB assuming its supervisory role in November 2014, and will include the findings of the three pillars of the comprehensive assessment.We will not publish any preliminary or intermediate results and I am quite surprised about the noise you hear these days in all directions about the possible outcome of the exercise. If we knew that “banks in the periphery will not face severe problems” or if we knew that “the recapitalisation needs will be a double digit bn figure” we could spare the effort in conducting this exercise. All these statements are mere speculation.The comprehensive assessment is an extraordinary opportunity to rebuild confidence in the banking sector and promote the long overdue repair of bank balance sheets, which in turn is a precondition for a sustainable economic recovery.One particular point needs to be stressed: credible national backstops must be put in place. If not, the credibility of the whole exercise is put at risk as the outcome will then almost certainly be negatively perceived by market participants. Doing this balance sheet assessment without a backstop in place would be a bit like getting on a boat in rough weather conditions, and not taking a life jacket on board. Any recapitalisation needs uncovered by the exercise should of course first and foremost be covered by the market. National budgets and national resolution funds may intervene as a second line. Finally, a European backstop, the ESM with its existing instruments, meaning a banking sector programme like in the case of Spain, may be available. The second key element of a banking union is the Single Resolution Mechanism, a European equivalent to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The crisis has shown that simple coordination among Member States has been inadequate to organise the resolution of cross-border banks in an efficient, quick and least-cost manner. The Single Resolution Mechanism contains three essential elements:First, a single regulatory framework. This will be established with the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD). The trilogue of the Council, the European Parliament and the Commission is currently ongoing and from an ECB perspective a desirable trilogue outcome would contain two elements.First, bringing forward bail-in to 2015 as markets will anticipate bail-in anyhow. Having the rules in place earlier will give investors’ bigger security. Second, the flexibility and scope for national solutions should be somewhat reduced so that market participants will have sufficient confidence about the rules of the game in Europe. The second element of the single resolution mechanism is the single resolution authority and the third, a single resolution fund, funded by contributions from the financial industry. The last two elements are currently in the legislative process and we strongly support the envisaged timeline for their entering into force (1 January 2015), as it ensures that the establishment of the Single Resolution Mechanism would follow shortly after the effective start of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. The ‘private banking union’ in the US is created by its integrated financial market, which includes both the banking sector and capital markets.In the banking sector, the US has genuinely nationwide banks, which allows them to better diversify risk. If such a bank makes losses on loans in one state it can offset them with gains in another – thus at least in part internalising the costs. In the euro area, however, banks tend to have a more domestic focus, meaning losses in one country are more likely to exhaust the capital of the domestic banks. In the capital markets, the US has integrated equity and debt markets, allowing losses from bank failures and corporate insolvencies to be dispersed across the whole market. In the euro area, by contrast, cross-border capital markets are only partially developed, which means the effect of a negative economic shock is fully concentrated at home. In Germany and France, for example, around 85% of equity is held domestically. One should not underestimate the importance of this: it has been estimated in a paper that two-thirds of economic shocks in the US are absorbed via the integrated financial market. [1] While the launch of the euro seems to have encouraged more private risk-sharing between EMU countries, it remains at much lower levels than between US states, and markets are vulnerable to fragmentation. [2] This point underscores that the private and public banking unions are to a significant extent interdependent. Having a strong set of federal institutions can stop market failures such as a fragmentation during a crisis. Similarly, having a single financial market can make the task of federal institutions easier, in particular for resolution, as it allows mergers and takeovers to be used as a primary resolution strategy.Indeed, 450 out of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s 490 bank resolutions since 2008 have involved what is called “Purchase and Assumption” – selling parts of banks to other banks, often located in different states. The conclusion from this is simple: completing the banking union and completing the single financial market go hand in hand.This brings me to the topic: how does the banking union relate to countries inside and outside the euro area?I will make three points here.First, the banking union is critical for the Euro Area countries.Second, it is also desirable for Member States, which do not share the euro.And third, the banking union should be about strengthening the internal market, rather than dividing it in two.Let me start with the first remark: the banking union is critical for the euro area countries.The reason why we are building it is to break the vicious circle between sovereigns and banks, the manifestations of which are much more acute and disruptive in a monetary union.That is why we need the Banking Union in the single currency area. But one thing must be clear: putting the Eurozone on a stronger footing will also benefit the countries that are not in the eurozone. The crisis has clearly shown that in Europe a receding tide lowers all the boats, not just the ones which are in trouble.My second remark is that the banking union – whilst critical for the ins – is also desirable for the outs. The so-called financial trilemma [3] – in other words the impossible trinity of financial integration, financial stability, and national responsibility for crisis prevention and management – holds for the entire region, and not just for the euro area. For example, the Swedish and Danish banking system are not only large in proportion to your GDP, but they are also very closely integrated with the rest of Europe. Let me focus on the case of the Danish banking sector. Danish banks’ consolidated assets are almost four times Denmark's GDP.The biggest banks have considerable cross-border activities. For these reasons, it would make perfect sense for Denmark to join a Banking Union that is composed not only of a single supervision mechanism, but also a single resolution mechanism with a resolution fund that can serve as an insurance scheme in relation to systemic banks. Whilst participating in the banking union therefore appears desirable, the terms of that participation should also be right.Indeed, we at the ECB consider it of the utmost importance to ensure that the participation of the outs occurs on equal terms as the Euro Area countries. On resolution, we need to find creative solutions to ensure a level-playing field between ins and outs. This holds also true for the backstop for the single resolution fund which is currently the subject of much discussion.Taking part in the Banking Union from the beginning would bring many benefits. Having a chair at the table now allows participants to steer the practical implementation of the SSM – for example the development of the supervisory manual, guidelines and general instructions, as well as benefit from the ‘healing effect’ that the comprehensive assessment should bring.Let me make a third remark: The banking union should be about strengthening the internal market, rather than fragmenting it.Both the single currency and the single market are key pillars of growth and prosperity in Europe. Both should be maintained and enhanced. Hence, the banking union should not create new barriers within the internal market.If countries choose not to join, they should not be discriminated against. Two safeguards will be crucial in this regard: having a single rulebook that sets the same standards for all, and having a strong and effective European Banking Authority with a fair representation of the outs.Let me now turn to the relation between banking union and fiscal union.For the fiscal union, finding the balance between cooperation and diversity is difficult. National preferences for taxing and spending are stronger, and the case for elevating certain functions to the European level is more complex. And there can be no taxation without representation, meaning any shift to a more European fiscal policy must be accompanied by the same shift towards European democratic control.So to frame the discussion, I think it is helpful to recall the taxonomy of economic policy functions described by Richard Musgrave. He distinguished between stabilisation, allocation and distribution. Broadly speaking, stabilisation helps smooth the business cycle, allocation ensures that resources are used efficiently and distribution ensures an equitable sharing of income. Concentrating on stabilisation, there is a long-standing debate in Europe about whether monetary union needs a federal budget to support counter-cyclical stabilisation. As you may know, the report by the four Presidents on a genuine EMU suggested that a small fiscal capacity could be used for this purpose. I do not want to comment on the specifics of this proposal, but there are questions about whether national preferences are sufficiently aligned to permit it. For that reason, we have to think carefully about whether it is essential for the euro area. In particular, we have to consider how having a genuine banking union might change the debate.As you know, stabilisation in Europe takes place through national budgets and, in normal circumstances, they are sufficient to smooth the cycle. A recent study demonstrates that 47% of an unemployment shock is absorbed by the automatic stabilisers in the EU, compared with only 34% in the US. [4] They were insufficient in some countries during the crisis only because they faced an exceptional circumstance: a very large shock from the financial sector.With a genuine banking union, however, the risk of this happening again should be lower. First, we expect the SSM to increase the quality of supervision and the assessment of systemic risk. Second, if a financial shock were still to appear, national budgets should be better insulated. The costs of banking sector repair would be shared with the private sector through the Single Resolution Mechanism and a more integrated European financial market. All this suggests that stabilisation at the national level could be more effective in future. Or put differently, the more successful we are in building a genuine banking union, the less we would need a central budget for stabilisation purposes.However, this does not mean I see no role for fiscal union in the stabilisation area. First, we would need the public backstop, namely for the future resolution fund, which would be fiscally neutral over the medium-term. In my view the ESM could play this role like the US Treasury does this for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation by providing a credit line. Since there has been some confusion in the past, I would like to reiterate that this would indeed require a change of the ESM Treaty but not of the EU Treaty.Second, we would need an insurance mechanism against tail events that may still arise and endanger euro area financial stability. Here we already have the ESM to act as lender of last resort to sovereigns.To sum up: a functioning banking union reduces the need for the stabilisation function of a fiscal union, but not to zero.I have tried to give you the ECB’s view on the various aspects of the banking union. Our preparations to take over the task of the SSM are well under way. We are adamantly convinced that banking union will only function if the SSM is complemented by a single resolution mechanism and that it is put in place without undue delay. Given the parliamentary recess as of May next year in view of the upcoming elections to the European Parliament, it is of utmost importance to have a political agreement on the Single Resolution Mechanism in the ECOFIN by the end of this year.To make this happen, all need to move. The following are the main open issues that need to be solved:First, the legal base: Article 114 of the EU Treaty on the establishment and functioning of the internal market is a possible legal base from our point of view, but it could also be based on the flexibility clause of Article 352.Second, the scope: The Commission proposal foresees that all banks in countries participating in the SSM should be covered by the SRM as well. My personal view is that a compromise should be possible here. Why not start with the systemic SSM banks, ie the 130 for which the ECB will be the direct supervisor, and progress further over time?Third, the resolution authority: It must fulfil three criteria. It has to be in a position to take decisions quickly, if needed during a weekend. That said, it is obvious that the Council cannot be the resolution authority. The resolution authority must be established quickly. That means there is no time to wait for a treaty change to establish a new institution. The new authority must take a European perspective on financial stability.Let me be clear that I do not see the task of the resolution authority with the ECB. There should be a clear division of labour between supervision and resolution.The fourth and last big open issue is how to finance the backstop for the single resolution fund as long as it is not sufficiently funded via levies from the banking sector. As mentioned before, I think the ESM including any non euro-area member states could provide a credit line to the resolution fund. That would guarantee a clear control over the resolution fund by the participating member states and their parliaments. A functioning banking union is in the best interest of Europe and it is in the best interest of Germany. [1]B. Sørensen and O. Yosha (1996), “Channels of interstate risk sharing: United States (1963-1990)”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, pp. 1081-1111[2]Y. Demyanyk, C. Ostergaard and B. Sørensen (2008), “Risk sharing and portfolio allocation in EMU”, DG Ecfin Economic Papers 334[3]Schoenmaker, D., (2011). ""The financial trilemma ,"" Economics Letters, vol. 111, pages 57-59, April[4]A recent study demonstrates that automatic stabilisers absorb 38% of a proportional income shock in the EU, compared with 32% in the US. In the case of an unemployment shock 47% of the shock is absorbed in the EU, compared with 34% in the US. This cushioning of disposable income leads to a demand stabilisation of up to 30% in the EU and up to 20% in the US. See: M. Dolls, C. Fuest and A. Peichl (2012), “Automatic stabilizers and economic crisis: US vs. Europe; Journal of Public Economics”, Elsevier, vol. 96(3), pp 279-294.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",dear mr aehl veranstalt dear colleagu ladi gentlemen time today confer singl resolut mechan limit bankregul could better chosen srm domin theme european fora moment thank invit happi share view bank union european central bank look back experi crisi think mani today share assess key problem past littl cooper much divers lack coher european approach financi sector polici clear scope cooper today particular experi crisi prefer align europ want bank well supervis resolv minimum cost taxpay achiev think need reinvent wheel element us approach work use borrow europ say one acknowledg cours us fulli integr feder state wherea european union remain construct sui generi forese futur therefor us approach cannot serv blueprint europ direct may prove right europ well element us approach fall two basic categori first call us public bank union feder institut deal bank crise second dub privat bank union integr financi market dissip cost crise clear key differ europ us bank problem us main taken care feder level wherea europ respons troubl bank thus far remain nation crisi us feder institut step breach feder deposit insur corpor fdic resolv unviabl bank use resourc deposit insur fund financ bank us treasuri provid recapitalis support guarante troubl asset relief program tarp feder reserv undertook thorough stresstest determin bank addit capit need understand situat europ use make thoughtexperi imagin feder institut exist us imagin state california would come tarp money well fargo instead us treasuri imagin state new york would provid guarante citigroup think market would rate agenc treat state would treat bank lesson euro area clear feder institut prevent local crise becom system europ yet feder institut act shock absorb far respons deal bank problem lie exclus individu eu countri result quot ft editori nation taxpay subsidis bank implicit good time explicit bad time suicid sovereign debt crisi inde crisi ireland shown problem domest bank overwhelm fiscal capac nation sovereign causal also way around case greec shown fiscal problem drag bank system countri got caught vicious fiscalfinanci feedback loop end also drag economi break intern market impair monetari polici conduct remov vicious feedback loop bank union creat bank union good euro good intern market good recoveri good euro help repair monetari polici transmiss mechan word ensur ecb low interest rate effect pass countri probabl need good intern market help revers signific financi fragment seen far good recoveri bank put stronger foot confid improv ultim credit start flow enterpris afford term necessari element bank union mind two element indispens singl supervisori mechan ssm singl resolut mechan srm furthermor import singl rulebook implement capit requir direct regul iv key respect singl european deposit insur top regulatori agenda today may tackl long term fact bank recoveri resolut direct brrd liabil cascad make clear deposit come end bank resolut thus need singl deposit insur scheme less urgent better harmonis could suffic present let start singl supervisori mechan ecb ask assum respons mechan mould exist nation supervisori author effect effici feder supervisori team make good progress front ssm becom fulli oper last quarter take task want get adequ view supervis come month ecb therefor undertak balanc sheet assess import exercis cannot overestim comprehens exercis encompass three step first supervisori risk assess review quantit qualit key risk includ liquid leverag fund second asset qualiti review aqr enhanc transpar bank exposur review qualiti bank asset includ adequaci asset collater valuat relat provis third stress test examin resili bank balanc sheet stress scenario three element close interlink comprehens assess conclud aggreg disclosur outcom countri bank level togeth recommend supervisori measur comprehens outcom publish prior ecb assum supervisori role novemb includ find three pillar comprehens assess publish preliminari intermedi result quit surpris nois hear day direct possibl outcom exercis knew bank peripheri face sever problem knew recapitalis need doubl digit bn figur could spare effort conduct exercis statement mere specul comprehens assess extraordinari opportun rebuild confid bank sector promot long overdu repair bank balanc sheet turn precondit sustain econom recoveri one particular point need stress credibl nation backstop must put place credibl whole exercis put risk outcom almost certain negat perceiv market particip balanc sheet assess without backstop place would bit like get boat rough weather condit take life jacket board recapitalis need uncov exercis cours first foremost cover market nation budget nation resolut fund may interven second line final european backstop esm exist instrument mean bank sector programm like case spain may avail second key element bank union singl resolut mechan european equival feder deposit insur corpor crisi shown simpl coordin among member state inadequ organis resolut crossbord bank effici quick leastcost manner singl resolut mechan contain three essenti element first singl regulatori framework establish bank recoveri resolut direct brrd trilogu council european parliament commiss current ongo ecb perspect desir trilogu outcom would contain two element first bring forward bailin market anticip bailin anyhow rule place earlier give investor bigger secur second flexibl scope nation solut somewhat reduc market particip suffici confid rule game europ second element singl resolut mechan singl resolut author third singl resolut fund fund contribut financi industri last two element current legisl process strong support envisag timelin enter forc januari ensur establish singl resolut mechan would follow short effect start singl supervisori mechan privat bank union us creat integr financi market includ bank sector capit market bank sector us genuin nationwid bank allow better diversifi risk bank make loss loan one state offset gain anoth thus least part internalis cost euro area howev bank tend domest focus mean loss one countri like exhaust capit domest bank capit market us integr equiti debt market allow loss bank failur corpor insolv dispers across whole market euro area contrast crossbord capit market partial develop mean effect negat econom shock fulli concentr home germani franc exampl around equiti held domest one underestim import estim paper twothird econom shock us absorb via integr financi market launch euro seem encourag privat riskshar emu countri remain much lower level us state market vulner fragment point underscor privat public bank union signific extent interdepend strong set feder institut stop market failur fragment crisi similar singl financi market make task feder institut easier particular resolut allow merger takeov use primari resolut strategi inde feder deposit insur corpor bank resolut sinc involv call purchas assumpt sell part bank bank often locat differ state conclus simpl complet bank union complet singl financi market go hand hand bring topic bank union relat countri insid outsid euro area make three point first bank union critic euro area countri second also desir member state share euro third bank union strengthen intern market rather divid two let start first remark bank union critic euro area countri reason build break vicious circl sovereign bank manifest much acut disrupt monetari union need bank union singl currenc area one thing must clear put eurozon stronger foot also benefit countri eurozon crisi clear shown europ reced tide lower boat one troubl second remark bank union whilst critic in also desir out socal financi trilemma word imposs triniti financi integr financi stabil nation respons crisi prevent manag hold entir region euro area exampl swedish danish bank system larg proport gdp also close integr rest europ let focus case danish bank sector danish bank consolid asset almost four time denmark gdp biggest bank consider crossbord activ reason would make perfect sens denmark join bank union compos singl supervis mechan also singl resolut mechan resolut fund serv insur scheme relat system bank whilst particip bank union therefor appear desir term particip also right inde ecb consid utmost import ensur particip out occur equal term euro area countri resolut need find creativ solut ensur levelplay field in out hold also true backstop singl resolut fund current subject much discuss take part bank union begin would bring mani benefit chair tabl allow particip steer practic implement ssm exampl develop supervisori manual guidelin general instruct well benefit heal effect comprehens assess bring let make third remark bank union strengthen intern market rather fragment singl currenc singl market key pillar growth prosper europ maintain enhanc henc bank union creat new barrier within intern market countri choos join discrimin two safeguard crucial regard singl rulebook set standard strong effect european bank author fair represent out let turn relat bank union fiscal union fiscal union find balanc cooper divers difficult nation prefer tax spend stronger case elev certain function european level complex taxat without represent mean shift european fiscal polici must accompani shift toward european democrat control frame discuss think help recal taxonomi econom polici function describ richard musgrav distinguish stabilis alloc distribut broad speak stabilis help smooth busi cycl alloc ensur resourc use effici distribut ensur equit share incom concentr stabilis longstand debat europ whether monetari union need feder budget support countercycl stabilis may know report four presid genuin emu suggest small fiscal capac could use purpos want comment specif propos question whether nation prefer suffici align permit reason think care whether essenti euro area particular consid genuin bank union might chang debat know stabilis europ take place nation budget normal circumst suffici smooth cycl recent studi demonstr unemploy shock absorb automat stabilis eu compar us insuffici countri crisi face except circumst larg shock financi sector genuin bank union howev risk happen lower first expect ssm increas qualiti supervis assess system risk second financi shock still appear nation budget better insul cost bank sector repair would share privat sector singl resolut mechan integr european financi market suggest stabilis nation level could effect futur put differ success build genuin bank union less would need central budget stabilis purpos howev mean see role fiscal union stabilis area first would need public backstop name futur resolut fund would fiscal neutral mediumterm view esm could play role like us treasuri feder deposit insur corpor provid credit line sinc confus past would like reiter would inde requir chang esm treati eu treati second would need insur mechan tail event may still aris endang euro area financi stabil alreadi esm act lender last resort sovereign sum function bank union reduc need stabilis function fiscal union zero tri give ecb view various aspect bank union prepar take task ssm well way adam convinc bank union function ssm complement singl resolut mechan put place without undu delay given parliamentari recess may next year view upcom elect european parliament utmost import polit agreement singl resolut mechan ecofin end year make happen need move follow main open issu need solv first legal base articl eu treati establish function intern market possibl legal base point view could also base flexibl claus articl second scope commiss propos forese bank countri particip ssm cover srm well person view compromis possibl start system ssm bank ie ecb direct supervisor progress time third resolut author must fulfil three criteria posit take decis quick need weekend said obvious council cannot resolut author resolut author must establish quick mean time wait treati chang establish new institut new author must take european perspect financi stabil let clear see task resolut author ecb clear divis labour supervis resolut fourth last big open issu financ backstop singl resolut fund long suffici fund via levi bank sector mention think esm includ non euroarea member state could provid credit line resolut fund would guarante clear control resolut fund particip member state parliament function bank union best interest europ best interest germani b sørensen o yosha channel interst risk share unit state quarter journal econom novemb pp y demyanyk c ostergaard b sørensen risk share portfolio alloc emu dg ecfin econom paper schoenmak d financi trilemma econom letter vol page april recent studi demonstr automat stabilis absorb proport incom shock eu compar us case unemploy shock shock absorb eu compar us cushion dispos incom lead demand stabilis eu us see m doll c fuest peichl automat stabil econom crisi us vs europ journal public econom elsevi vol pp reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en