Lucas Papademos: Adoption of the euro by Cyprus and Malta,10-07-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,765,"<p>Dear Commissioner Almunia, Dear President of the ECOFIN Council, Minister Teixeira dos SantosDear Prime Minister Gonzi, Dear Minister Sarris, Dear Governor Bonello,Ladies and Gentlemen,In less than six months from now, the euro will be part of the everyday life as the new currency of the people of Cyprus and Malta. This is an essential and practical consequence of the decision taken by the ECOFIN Council today. It is a momentous decision in the history of both countries. And it is the culmination point of a process of economic adjustment and technical preparations. On behalf of the entire Governing Council of the European Central Bank, I would like to warmly congratulate all those involved in this process, and the people of Cyprus and Malta, on this accomplishment! The enlargement of the euro area to include these two countries is a significant and joyful event, not just for them, but also for all of us who are already part of the European monetary union. We at the ECB and the Eurosystem are particularly pleased to welcome two new members in our central banking “team”. The Central Banks of Cyprus and Malta will become members of the Eurosystem. And the Governor of the Central Bank of Cyprus, Athanasios Orphanides, and the Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, Michael C. Bonello will become members of the Governing Council of the ECB. The two governors, together with the other 19 members of the ECB’s Governing Council, will thus participate fully in the decision-making concerning the single monetary policy. We are looking forward to benefit from their experience and expertise in our deliberations. Together, we will continue to analyse carefully the economic situation and outlook in the euro area and to do what is necessary to fulfil our mandate: to maintain price stability in the euro area as a whole, to the benefit of soon 15 countries and 319 million Europeans. I am sure that the people of Cyprus and Malta are looking forward to the changeover to the euro. They rightly expect that it will take place smoothly and that they are informed about their new banknotes and coins. A smooth changeover to the euro will enhance their trust in the safety and integrity of their new currency. To this end, the ECB, in close co-operation with the Central Bank of Cyprus and the Central Bank of Malta, have embarked in comprehensive euro information campaigns on the euro banknotes and coins in the two countries and will take all measures necessary to ensure a successful transition from the Cyprus and Maltese pounds to the euro. Thankfully, we have by now accumulated certain experience with such changeover processes. The euro changeover that took place early this year in Slovenia was a great success. Within a short period of time, Slovenians had completely accepted the new currency and integrated it in their daily life. I am confident that the Cypriots and the Maltese will also benefit from the undeniable economic advantages of belonging to the single European currency area. As part of our experiences with previous changeovers to the euro, we know that we have to monitor carefully that prices are converted properly, and that the changeover should not be used as an occasion to raise prices in an unfounded and inordinate manner. It is therefore encouraging to see the positive outcome of several “price watching” movements in Cyprus and Malta, be they grass-roots or institutionally organised. And I have no doubt that the Cypriots and Maltese will be vigilant consumers.Entering monetary union is a historic undertaking. Both countries have taken an irreversible step towards deeper economic integration within the euro area; they are now part of what can be called a “community with a common destiny”, or – it is maybe better to use the German term – a “Schicksalsgemeinschaft”. The stability and dynamism of the economies of Cyprus and Malta, and the welfare of their people, will be of importance to all of us who share the single currency. Similarly, the growth and prosperity of the euro area as a whole will be a matter of significant interest also for the people of Cyprus and Malta. Just like the members of a family, all members of the euro area should discuss together and take the best course of action, for the benefit of each and of all.Let me conclude by congratulating, once again, Cyprus and Malta for this great achievement, to become part of the euro area and to adopt “The EURO. OUR money.” Κύπρο, καλωσόρισες! Merħba, Malta! Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",dear commission almunia dear presid ecofin council minist teixeira dos santosdear prime minist gonzi dear minist sarri dear governor bonello ladi gentlemen less six month euro part everyday life new currenc peopl cyprus malta essenti practic consequ decis taken ecofin council today moment decis histori countri culmin point process econom adjust technic prepar behalf entir govern council european central bank would like warm congratul involv process peopl cyprus malta accomplish enlarg euro area includ two countri signific joy event also us alreadi part european monetari union ecb eurosystem particular pleas welcom two new member central bank team central bank cyprus malta becom member eurosystem governor central bank cyprus athanasio orphanid governor central bank malta c bonello becom member govern council ecb two governor togeth member ecb govern council thus particip fulli decisionmak concern singl monetari polici look forward benefit experi expertis deliber togeth continu analys care econom situat outlook euro area necessari fulfil mandat maintain price stabil euro area whole benefit soon countri million european sure peopl cyprus malta look forward changeov euro right expect take place smooth inform new banknot coin smooth changeov euro enhanc trust safeti integr new currenc end ecb close cooper central bank cyprus central bank malta embark comprehens euro inform campaign euro banknot coin two countri take measur necessari ensur success transit cyprus maltes pound euro thank accumul certain experi changeov process euro changeov took place earli year slovenia great success within short period time slovenian complet accept new currenc integr daili life confid cypriot maltes also benefit undeni econom advantag belong singl european currenc area part experi previous changeov euro know monitor care price convert proper changeov use occas rais price unfound inordin manner therefor encourag see posit outcom sever price watch movement cyprus malta grassroot institut organis doubt cypriot maltes vigil consum enter monetari union histor undertak countri taken irrevers step toward deeper econom integr within euro area part call communiti common destini mayb better use german term schicksalsgemeinschaft stabil dynam economi cyprus malta welfar peopl import us share singl currenc similar growth prosper euro area whole matter signific interest also peopl cyprus malta like member famili member euro area discuss togeth take best cours action benefit let conclud congratul cyprus malta great achiev becom part euro area adopt euro money κύπρο καλωσόρισες merħba malta reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en