Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Corporates in the Single Euro Payments Area: Business as usual?,17-04-2008,European Central Bank,ECB,2047,"<p>[Slide 1]It gives me great pleasure today to take part in the 20th Finanzsymposium, which has brought together some of the main corporates active in Europe. The main topic of this session is the major changes that have been observed in the financial industry over the past few years, and the changes that may occur over the next two decades. [Slide 2]After many years of economic and financial integration, I would like to address an issue that has so far received little attention from the corporate side: integration in the retail payments market. In this panel session, let us discuss the extent to which the most recent payment developments are having a positive impact on your businesses.Since the launch of the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) in January this year, it is no longer simply “business as usual”. Through SEPA, a single European market place has been created, which will be of great benefit to corporates. The SEPA project will bring about a comprehensive, pan-European harmonisation of payment instruments for euro payments.In January 2008, the banking community successfully launched the SEPA credit transfer, as well as a common framework for card payments. These will be followed by the SEPA direct debit before the end of next year. The new Single Euro Payments Area enables customers to make payments anywhere in the euro area as quickly, safely and easily as they can in their own country. Within SEPA, all euro payments are treated as domestic payments and are carried out using a single set of payment instruments.The Single Market also stands to benefit considerably from the wide range of new opportunities that have been opened up through the launch of SEPA, as it will promote competition and innovation, as well as improve conditions for customers. In this context, I would like to draw your attention to a recently published study on the economic impact of SEPA, which was carried out by the ECB in close cooperation with a number of European banks.The study clearly shows that it depends on the interplay between two forces. On the one hand, greater competition resulting from the abolition of cross-border barriers will determine banks’ earnings. On the other hand, an electronic, fully automated SEPA environment means that banks will benefit from efficiency gains and potential economies of scale.The ECB’s study also reflects banks’ expectations that, in the future, more use will be made of more alternative, innovative payment methods than cash. [1] The ECB, as well as the national central banks, are striving for more integration in the financial markets. Public authorities are responsible for providing an adequate framework that is conducive to such financial integration, i.e. legislation and rules for cross-border transactions that guarantee a level playing-field for all market participants. The adoption of the Payment Services Directive in 2007 was a major step in this regard. Now it just needs to be transposed into national law. [Slide 3]The impact of SEPA is expected to be substantial. A recent study conducted on behalf of the European Commission [2] mentions that banks and their customers are expected to benefit from SEPA. It is calculated that these benefits could reach €123 billion (cumulative over six years). However, the study also clearly points out that, if stakeholders are reluctant to embrace SEPA and if the migration towards SEPA does not take place in a timely and comprehensive manner, there are likely to be fewer benefits for customers and banks and corporates could even record losses – for example if participants have to run systems in parallel due to a slow migration process. For corporates, SEPA will have an impact in three areas in particular:First, SEPA will simplify payments. For their incoming and outgoing euro payments, corporates will be able to use a pan-European, single set of instruments and arrangements based on the latest international standards. Pricing is expected to be competitive and services will improve due to the competition at the pan-European level.Second, SEPA provides greater clarity and will enable corporates to manage and transfer their liquidity in a cheaper and faster manner. SEPA provides clarity on the timing of payment processing cycles and possible revocations. For example, thanks to SEPA, corporates are aware of the maximum processing time for payments, as well as the maximum amount of time customers have to revoke a direct debit in Europe.Third, additional standards are being created to optimise processes, as well as to facilitate better interfaces between the financial management systems of corporates (i.e. enterprise resource planning systems) and the systems operated by banks. New standards will allow account-related information to be handled more efficiently. Corporates will also receive additional information on their bank statements thanks to SEPA. [Slide 4]Let me now turn to those issues that need to be addressed by corporates in order to ensure that SEPA is implemented successfully. First, corporates will have to migrate their databases, which still contain national account numbers, in order to incorporate the international bank account numbers. Most euro area countries have agreed on a migration procedure aimed at assisting the corporates to do this. [3]Second, corporates will have to contact the banks in order to be able to better evaluate the benefits that SEPA will bring to their organisation. Banks will provide information as to how products and payment cycles may be improved, but you could also contact your provider directly with regard to better products.Third, corporates could plan ahead. Several initiatives are under way, which are focusing on corporate-to-bank connectivity and a standardised way of transmitting remittance information with the payment. So far, not many corporates have actively started preparing themselves for SEPA, as for them, the precise impact of SEPA is not entirely clear. This is probably related to the initial reluctance of banks and software providers to communicate on SEPA, as some of their products are still in the pilot phase. By the end of 2010, we expect the vast majority of payments to be executed as SEPA payments. However, it is becoming increasingly clear that there is a need to specify an end date on which the current payment instruments will be phased out. [4] Discussions have already begun and I hope that progress will soon be made in this regard.  [Slide 5]Of course, the SEPA project is by no means complete. Other topics, which are currently being worked on in the banking industry, include future payment instruments, such as the SEPA direct debit [5] and an additional European card scheme. The European Payments Council (EPC), in collaboration with the Eurosystem and European Commission, is currently looking into different ways of ensuring that the new services are ultimately at least as good as the current ones and that they meet customers’ requirements. For example, all direct debits will have to be changed so that they comply with the new Payment Services Directive, which will have been transposed by the end of November 2009 [6]. In terms of cards, the Eurosystem is contributing to the clarification of the economic and political rationale for an additional European card scheme, and is identifying practical steps that could be taken in this direction. I expect that the details on the SEPA products and the migration times will soon become clearer, and that stakeholders will become more actively involved in the SEPA debate. Indeed, I have been informed that some forward-looking corporates have already started to prepare themselves for SEPA credit transfers.They have started to introduce the new SEPA standards, have improved their connectivity with banks – and all this in the light of a more competitive service (and more competitive pricing behaviour). [Slide 6]Finally, I would like to turn to innovation and the role of the corporates over the next few years. In general, innovation occurs on different levels. It could lead toimproved goods and services (such as SEPA instruments);improved organisational processes (such as supply chain innovation); improved production processes (such as specialised payment factories or outsourcing).Regarding the first level of innovation, i.e. product and services innovation, I assume that, with SEPA, the new payment instruments for Europe will be at least as efficient, easy and secure as they are today in your own countries.Furthermore, the banking industry is already thinking about expanding its range of SEPA instruments to include pan-European online and mobile payments, which will lead to a further broadening and deepening of SEPA.The second level is process innovation. The assumption is that SEPA will lead to a better organisation of processes and constitute a first step towards the end-to-end straight-through processing (STP) of payments and collections.Corporates will then be able to interact better with their counterparts and conduct their financial transactions more easily, irrespective of where they are located. The banking industry (e.g. via the Euro Banking Association) has also started to look into electronic invoicing (e-invoicing), and the European Commission is currently analysing the legal issues with regard to e-invoicing (such as electronic signature). In addition, the ISO (International Organization for Standardization) has started work on harmonising procedures for reporting and bank statements. Ultimately, the entire supply chain will be improved.Third, the production process will be improved. For payments, this could mean that more use is made of outsourcing and payment factories, which, thanks to economies of scale, can also be offered by non-banks. Banks could even set up their own “non-banks” to whom they could outsource some of their payment functions. It remains to be seen to what extent outsourcing could be expanded. Corporates have two important roles to play in these different levels of innovation. On the one hand, they are playing an important role, together with the banking industry, in the creation of these new payment solutions and the related processes. On the other hand, they are also key players in the implementation of the European solutions.Let me now conclude.[Slide 7]Since January 2008, payment services have been offered at a pan-European level. Within SEPA, there is no longer any difference between domestic and cross-border euro payments within SEPA when using the SEPA credit transfer. SEPA has triggered an entire process of reforms which will further improve the functioning of the financial system. I am confident that corporates will play a role in creating a more innovative and integrated market.My “fellow countryman” Joseph Schumpeter coined the phrase “innovative entrepreneur” (schöpferischer Unternehmer). There is now demand for future-oriented corporates who will use SEPA as to drive the optimisation of processes and thereby provide the necessary requirements for innovation, which will encourage economic growth and social change. It is encouraging to see that some entrepreneurs are already very active in the debate on the future SEPA instruments. A forum has been created at the European level to enable stakeholders to be more closely involved in the SEPA project. This is called the Customer Stakeholder Forum. There are also forums at the national level that are working on improvements and innovation for the next 20 years. I hope that many corporates will join the discussions in the forums and thus improve the European launch pad known as SEPA.Thank you for your attention.[1] Schmiedel (2007), “The economic impact of the Single Euro Payments Area”, ECB Occasional Paper Series, August.[2] “SEPA: potential benefits at stake – Researching the impact of SEPA on the payments market and its stakeholders”, Capgemini Consulting.[3] So far, a conversion procedure for migrating from the traditional national account number (BBAN) to the international account number (IBAN) has been agreed in 13 euro area countries (BE, DE, ES, FR, GR, IT, CY, LU, MT, NL, AT, SI, FI). The decision process has not yet been finalised in two euro area countries (IE, PT).[4] So far, a schedule for the phasing-out of national payment instruments has been agreed in six euro area countries (BE, FR, CY, NL, SI and FI). [5] With regard to direct debits, the Eurosystem is encouraging the migration of existing mandates towards the new SEPA direct debit scheme, and we are facilitating discussion between competition authorities and the banking industry in order to clarify the features of this scheme.[6] Directive 2007/64/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 November 2007 on payment services in the internal market amending Directives 97/7/EC, 2002/65/EC, 2005/60/EC and 2006/48/EC and repealing Directive 97/5/EC (Text with EEA relevance).Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",slide give great pleasur today take part th finanzsymposium brought togeth main corpor activ europ main topic session major chang observ financi industri past year chang may occur next two decad slide mani year econom financi integr would like address issu far receiv littl attent corpor side integr retail payment market panel session let us discuss extent recent payment develop posit impact busi sinc launch singl euro payment area sepa januari year longer simpli busi usual sepa singl european market place creat great benefit corpor sepa project bring comprehens paneuropean harmonis payment instrument euro payment januari bank communiti success launch sepa credit transfer well common framework card payment follow sepa direct debit end next year new singl euro payment area enabl custom make payment anywher euro area quick safe easili countri within sepa euro payment treat domest payment carri use singl set payment instrument singl market also stand benefit consider wide rang new opportun open launch sepa promot competit innov well improv condit custom context would like draw attent recent publish studi econom impact sepa carri ecb close cooper number european bank studi clear show depend interplay two forc one hand greater competit result abolit crossbord barrier determin bank earn hand electron fulli autom sepa environ mean bank benefit effici gain potenti economi scale ecb studi also reflect bank expect futur use made altern innov payment method cash ecb well nation central bank strive integr financi market public author respons provid adequ framework conduc financi integr e legisl rule crossbord transact guarante level playingfield market particip adopt payment servic direct major step regard need transpos nation law slide impact sepa expect substanti recent studi conduct behalf european commiss mention bank custom expect benefit sepa calcul benefit could reach billion cumul six year howev studi also clear point stakehold reluct embrac sepa migrat toward sepa take place time comprehens manner like fewer benefit custom bank corpor could even record loss exampl particip run system parallel due slow migrat process corpor sepa impact three area particular first sepa simplifi payment incom outgo euro payment corpor abl use paneuropean singl set instrument arrang base latest intern standard price expect competit servic improv due competit paneuropean level second sepa provid greater clariti enabl corpor manag transfer liquid cheaper faster manner sepa provid clariti time payment process cycl possibl revoc exampl thank sepa corpor awar maximum process time payment well maximum amount time custom revok direct debit europ third addit standard creat optimis process well facilit better interfac financi manag system corpor e enterpris resourc plan system system oper bank new standard allow accountrel inform handl effici corpor also receiv addit inform bank statement thank sepa slide let turn issu need address corpor order ensur sepa implement success first corpor migrat databas still contain nation account number order incorpor intern bank account number euro area countri agre migrat procedur aim assist corpor second corpor contact bank order abl better evalu benefit sepa bring organis bank provid inform product payment cycl may improv could also contact provid direct regard better product third corpor could plan ahead sever initi way focus corporatetobank connect standardis way transmit remitt inform payment far mani corpor activ start prepar sepa precis impact sepa entir clear probabl relat initi reluct bank softwar provid communic sepa product still pilot phase end expect vast major payment execut sepa payment howev becom increas clear need specifi end date current payment instrument phase discuss alreadi begun hope progress soon made regard slide cours sepa project mean complet topic current work bank industri includ futur payment instrument sepa direct debit addit european card scheme european payment council epc collabor eurosystem european commiss current look differ way ensur new servic ultim least good current one meet custom requir exampl direct debit chang compli new payment servic direct transpos end novemb term card eurosystem contribut clarif econom polit rational addit european card scheme identifi practic step could taken direct expect detail sepa product migrat time soon becom clearer stakehold becom activ involv sepa debat inde inform forwardlook corpor alreadi start prepar sepa credit transfer start introduc new sepa standard improv connect bank light competit servic competit price behaviour slide final would like turn innov role corpor next year general innov occur differ level could lead toimprov good servic sepa instrument improv organis process suppli chain innov improv product process specialis payment factori outsourc regard first level innov e product servic innov assum sepa new payment instrument europ least effici easi secur today countri furthermor bank industri alreadi think expand rang sepa instrument includ paneuropean onlin mobil payment lead broaden deepen sepa second level process innov assumpt sepa lead better organis process constitut first step toward endtoend straightthrough process stp payment collect corpor abl interact better counterpart conduct financi transact easili irrespect locat bank industri e g via euro bank associ also start look electron invoic einvoic european commiss current analys legal issu regard einvoic electron signatur addit iso intern organ standard start work harmonis procedur report bank statement ultim entir suppli chain improv third product process improv payment could mean use made outsourc payment factori thank economi scale also offer nonbank bank could even set nonbank could outsourc payment function remain seen extent outsourc could expand corpor two import role play differ level innov one hand play import role togeth bank industri creation new payment solut relat process hand also key player implement european solut let conclud slide sinc januari payment servic offer paneuropean level within sepa longer differ domest crossbord euro payment within sepa use sepa credit transfer sepa trigger entir process reform improv function financi system confid corpor play role creat innov integr market fellow countryman schumpet coin phrase innov entrepreneur schöpferisch unternehm demand futureori corpor use sepa drive optimis process therebi provid necessari requir innov encourag econom growth social chang encourag see entrepreneur alreadi activ debat futur sepa instrument forum creat european level enabl stakehold close involv sepa project call custom stakehold forum also forum nation level work improv innov next year hope mani corpor join discuss forum thus improv european launch pad known sepa thank attent schmiedel econom impact singl euro payment area ecb occasion paper seri august sepa potenti benefit stake research impact sepa payment market stakehold capgemini consult far convers procedur migrat tradit nation account number bban intern account number iban agre euro area countri de es fr gr cy lu mt nl si fi decis process yet finalis two euro area countri ie pt far schedul phasingout nation payment instrument agre six euro area countri fr cy nl si fi regard direct debit eurosystem encourag migrat exist mandat toward new sepa direct debit scheme facilit discuss competit author bank industri order clarifi featur scheme direct ec european parliament council novemb payment servic intern market amend direct ec ec ec ec repeal direct ec text eea relev reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en