Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Banking supervision and corporate governance in the European architecture,30-03-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,1791,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,It is a great pleasure to speak to you on this occasion here in Moscow. The Cooperation Programme that ends today has been very successful in two important fields for central banks: banking supervision and internal audit. Looking back at this venture, we can see that three unusual, eventful years have passed since 1 April 2008. The macroeconomic, financial, and also political environments in the euro area and around the globe have been in a state of flux, and sometimes in turmoil. Likewise we all have been moved and saddened by natural disasters and human error, by acts of war and acts of terror. At the same time, these three years have also seen remarkably positive events. The Central Bank of the Russian Federation celebrated its 150th anniversary last year. It steered its way successfully through the financial crisis. The Bank of Russia became a member of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and of the Financial Stability Board. The European Central Bank, meanwhile, marked the tenth anniversary of the euro. It became an EU institution as a result of the Treaty of Lisbon in 2009. And the EU Commission here in Russia has also had a change of status: it is now the EU Delegation to the Russian Federation and is part of the European External Action Service.As I just said, banking supervision and internal audit have been the focus of work here these past three years. A three-way partnership was formed, consisting of the EU Delegation, the Bank of Russia and the Eurosystem. The Eurosystem acted through the ECB and eight national central banks: the Deutsche Bundesbank, Banque de France, Banca d’Italia, Banco de España, De Nederlandsche Bank, Oesterreichische Nationalbank, Bank of Greece and Suomen Pankki/Finlands Bank. The coming years are likely to be just as challenging as recent years. Central banks will be required to act as anchors of monetary and financial stability in a rapidly changing world. The Eurosystem central banks are cooperating in banking supervision, financial stability, internal audit and in many other fields. In addition to the Programme here in Russia, a Eurosystem programme on Basel II is under way involving the Central Bank of Egypt. A crisis response package covering banking supervision and financial crisis management is being conducted with south-eastern European countries. And technical assistance is being given to a number of would-be EU members. Generally, Europe has responded to the challenges of the past few years in a structured and thoughtful way. The creation of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) broadens the scope of cooperation and institutional awareness in respect of macroprudential oversight. The ECB is the supporting institution and provides, inter alia, analytical and statistical inputs to the ESRB structures. The Risk Board enables European regulators and supervisors to complement the microprudential perspective with a systematic monitoring and assessment of potential dangers to the stability of the system as a whole. The discipline of macroprudential supervision combines the information and assessments obtained via microprudential supervision with macroeconomic and monetary insights. We expect macroprudential measures, such as countercyclical provisioning, to mitigate systemic risks. We also expect the findings of macroprudential oversight to feed into the microprudential work that alerts supervisors and the wider world to macroeconomic risks.Besides setting up the ESRB, on 1  January this year, three European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) came into being: the European Banking Authority, the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority and the European Securities and Markets Authority. We expect that these new institutions will sustainably enhance microprudential supervision in Europe.Currently, the EU and euro area financial system continue to face several important risks. The main source of concern is the interplay between fiscal imbalances, downside risks to economic growth and bank funding vulnerabilities. Although this interplay is limited to a small number of euro area countries, with a relatively small share of total EU and euro area GDP, potential contagion to other EU or euro area countries is not insignificant. In this respect, let me state how surprised I am to see how quickly some of the lessons of the crisis are being forgotten. One of the lessons is the need to assess risk in a systemic way, not only at the micro level. There can be no systemic assessment without taking contagion into account, across instruments, across markets and across countries. The sub-prime crisis or the collapse of Lehman have clearly shown how devastating contagion can be! It is thus all the more surprising to see how in the current environment some policy makers, academics or editorialists totally ignore the systemic dimension of financial markets in their proposals for very specific issues like for instance bank debt. Thinking that a specific category of assets - such as senior bank bonds - can be treated in a specific way without immediately affecting all other assets, or that certain banks can be treated in a way that does not impact the whole system, not only within a country but also cross border is a testimony of short memory. The same applies for sovereign debt instruments.The risks related to the re-emergence of global imbalances and any disorderly unwinding are also considerable. Moreover, the catastrophe in Japan and tensions in the Middle East show us that risks of various sorts (natural, geopolitical, etc…) are never far away. In addition, a new round of stress tests is being carried out between March and June this year, with the final set of results to be published in June. There have been many comments and discussions about these stress tests, often without sufficient information. There is no doubt that the success of these tests depends on their full understanding on the parts of market participants. It is thus essential that supervisory authorities coordinate closely within the EBA their communication strategy. It’s no time for cacophony, nor for national authorities to engage in a beauty contest. Compared to the previous round, the underlying scenarios are considerably more adverse, in particular in terms of overall decline in GDP which encompasses the sum of all the parameter changes (interest rates, haircuts, probability of default, …). The probability of the scenario is, over a two year horizon, much lower, especially for 2011 where it is 1%, instead of 7% last year. Moreover, national supervisors and banks will have less discretion in conducting the tests. This time the EBA will be giving direct guidance regarding the definition and projections of pre-provision operating profits, including the increased cost of funding. The thresholds in the stress tests will be set at levels which are substantially higher than the minimum solvency requirements.In a broader sense, Europe has been actively contributing to stronger prudential supervision, notably banking supervision. At both global and national levels, there has been a marked tightening of banking and prudential rules. Work on corporate governance and internal audit has progressed too. In light of the financial crisis experienced in advanced economies, it could fairly be asked whether the rules are to be blamed or the way in which they were applied. The answer to this question is pertinent also for this cooperation Programme. In fact, it was decided that work foreseen in the Programme concerning the implementation of the Basel II framework should continue. Basel II focuses on risk-based supervision. It requires banks to operate a structured risk management. The internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) required by pillar 2 is a model for systematic strategic planning for any financial enterprise. Financial firms must have an understanding of their risk and capital situation. They are required to have a continual review of their risks, capital and business environment. I think that they will flourish only if they embrace in their corporate processes and culture the continual learning paradigm. This focus on the systematic management of a financial institution has been repeatedly stressed in both parts of the Cooperation Programme. Rightly so: the soundness of a financial firm depends on its own managers’ capability to understand, measure and master the risks, and to grasp the business opportunities on the basis of a good control of the downside risks. That capability constitutes its first line of defence. Supervision can only be the second line of defence.The internal audit part of the Cooperation Programme has focused on risk-based audit and IT audit. The audit function is oriented towards the organisation’s objectives. Internal audit delivers independent views and advice on the governance of the organisation. A comprehensive and systematic view of the risks posed to the objectives and the organisation as a whole guide the auditors in the planning of their work as well as in the follow-up to their recommendations. As IT is nowadays an intrinsic part of the infrastructure as well as a critical business tool, the Programme’s focus on the particular challenges of the IT audit was certainly appropriate. Overall, the Programme emphasised risk orientation rather than compliance checks, an approach that is indispensable today. Only an audit function that understands the dynamics of the changing environment and the impact of these changes on the organisation’s objectives can provide the necessary reassurance to the organisation’s top management. The Programme has contributed to such a risk orientation – which has meant a considerable cultural change for the audit function. I think that risk-based audits need two key ingredients for success: firstly, chief auditors must enjoy the full trust and backing of the organisation’s top management, even when they convey unpleasant or unwelcome messages. And secondly, the auditors can only do their job properly if they are empowered to act autonomously. I have sought today to shed some light on the importance of various tools for the soundness of our financial systems: banking supervision, internal audit, micro and macroprudential supervision as well as audit and corporate governance. The ‘investment’ that this Programme has made in banking supervision, as society’s ‘systemic financial risk management’, and in internal audit, as an element to help an organisation achieve its objectives, is fully in line with this approach. I am confident that the investment will bear fruit in the years to come. Finally, let me thank all those involved in this project – the EU Delegation, the Bank of Russia and also the colleagues from the eight national central banks and the ECB. It’s the close cooperation in these uncertain times which has made this remarkable project so successful. I sense that, although we are concluding this particular venture, the challenges of the future and the very positive experience of this Programme will certainly justify new partnerships in the future. I sense that there is no shortage of interest and enthusiasm to join forces again. Many thanks to all those who contributed. And thank you for your attention.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur speak occas moscow cooper programm end today success two import field central bank bank supervis intern audit look back ventur see three unusu event year pass sinc april macroeconom financi also polit environ euro area around globe state flux sometim turmoil likewis move sadden natur disast human error act war act terror time three year also seen remark posit event central bank russian feder celebr th anniversari last year steer way success financi crisi bank russia becam member basel committe bank supervis financi stabil board european central bank meanwhil mark tenth anniversari euro becam eu institut result treati lisbon eu commiss russia also chang status eu deleg russian feder part european extern action servic said bank supervis intern audit focus work past three year threeway partnership form consist eu deleg bank russia eurosystem eurosystem act ecb eight nation central bank deutsch bundesbank banqu de franc banca d italia banco de españa de nederlandsch bank oesterreichisch nationalbank bank greec suomen pankkifinland bank come year like challeng recent year central bank requir act anchor monetari financi stabil rapid chang world eurosystem central bank cooper bank supervis financi stabil intern audit mani field addit programm russia eurosystem programm basel ii way involv central bank egypt crisi respons packag cover bank supervis financi crisi manag conduct southeastern european countri technic assist given number wouldb eu member general europ respond challeng past year structur thought way creation european system risk board esrb broaden scope cooper institut awar respect macroprudenti oversight ecb support institut provid inter alia analyt statist input esrb structur risk board enabl european regul supervisor complement microprudenti perspect systemat monitor assess potenti danger stabil system whole disciplin macroprudenti supervis combin inform assess obtain via microprudenti supervis macroeconom monetari insight expect macroprudenti measur countercycl provis mitig system risk also expect find macroprudenti oversight feed microprudenti work alert supervisor wider world macroeconom risk besid set esrb januari year three european supervisori author esa came european bank author european insur occup pension author european secur market author expect new institut sustain enhanc microprudenti supervis europ current eu euro area financi system continu face sever import risk main sourc concern interplay fiscal imbal downsid risk econom growth bank fund vulner although interplay limit small number euro area countri relat small share total eu euro area gdp potenti contagion eu euro area countri insignific respect let state surpris see quick lesson crisi forgotten one lesson need assess risk system way micro level system assess without take contagion account across instrument across market across countri subprim crisi collaps lehman clear shown devast contagion thus surpris see current environ polici maker academ editorialist total ignor system dimens financi market propos specif issu like instanc bank debt think specif categori asset senior bank bond treat specif way without immedi affect asset certain bank treat way impact whole system within countri also cross border testimoni short memori appli sovereign debt instrument risk relat reemerg global imbal disord unwind also consider moreov catastroph japan tension middl east show us risk various sort natur geopolit etc never far away addit new round stress test carri march june year final set result publish june mani comment discuss stress test often without suffici inform doubt success test depend full understand part market particip thus essenti supervisori author coordin close within eba communic strategi time cacophoni nation author engag beauti contest compar previous round under scenario consider advers particular term overal declin gdp encompass sum paramet chang interest rate haircut probabl default probabl scenario two year horizon much lower especi instead last year moreov nation supervisor bank less discret conduct test time eba give direct guidanc regard definit project preprovis oper profit includ increas cost fund threshold stress test set level substanti higher minimum solvenc requir broader sens europ activ contribut stronger prudenti supervis notabl bank supervis global nation level mark tighten bank prudenti rule work corpor govern intern audit progress light financi crisi experienc advanc economi could fair ask whether rule blame way appli answer question pertin also cooper programm fact decid work foreseen programm concern implement basel ii framework continu basel ii focus riskbas supervis requir bank oper structur risk manag intern capit adequaci assess process icaap requir pillar model systemat strateg plan financi enterpris financi firm must understand risk capit situat requir continu review risk capit busi environ think flourish embrac corpor process cultur continu learn paradigm focus systemat manag financi institut repeat stress part cooper programm right sound financi firm depend manag capabl understand measur master risk grasp busi opportun basi good control downsid risk capabl constitut first line defenc supervis second line defenc intern audit part cooper programm focus riskbas audit audit audit function orient toward organis object intern audit deliv independ view advic govern organis comprehens systemat view risk pose object organis whole guid auditor plan work well followup recommend nowaday intrins part infrastructur well critic busi tool programm focus particular challeng audit certain appropri overal programm emphasis risk orient rather complianc check approach indispens today audit function understand dynam chang environ impact chang organis object provid necessari reassur organis top manag programm contribut risk orient meant consider cultur chang audit function think riskbas audit need two key ingredi success first chief auditor must enjoy full trust back organis top manag even convey unpleas unwelcom messag second auditor job proper empow act autonom sought today shed light import various tool sound financi system bank supervis intern audit micro macroprudenti supervis well audit corpor govern invest programm made bank supervis societi system financi risk manag intern audit element help organis achiev object fulli line approach confid invest bear fruit year come final let thank involv project eu deleg bank russia also colleagu eight nation central bank ecb close cooper uncertain time made remark project success sens although conclud particular ventur challeng futur posit experi programm certain justifi new partnership futur sens shortag interest enthusiasm join forc mani thank contribut thank attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en