Peter Praet: Current issues of monetary policy,03-07-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,5538,"<p>Dear President Snower, Dear Professor Lehment, Ladies and Gentlemen, [1] It is a real pleasure to be here with you today. This year marks the centenary of the Kiel Institute for the World Economy. Over the past 100 years, the Kiel Institute has contributed thoughtfully to the debates on the most pressing economic policy issues in Germany, Europe and the global economy. It has become one of the leading independent think tanks in the world. You chose a truly interesting – and challenging – topic for this year’s summer school: reassessing monetary policy. Over the past six years monetary policy has been firmly in the spotlight – more than central bankers are normally used to. The financial crisis has had important consequences for central banks and monetary policy. In particular, financial stability considerations are far more present in central banks today.Still “re-assessing” sounds in my view somewhat too strong. I would argue that the principles of sound monetary policy remain largely unchanged. What has changed, in particular, is the environment in which monetary policy is operating and the measures that are needed to combat risks to price stability. My predecessor, Otmar Issing, has dubbed this a “lost paradise”. [2] If you recall, in the years preceding the start of the crisis, at the time of the so-called “Great Moderation”, there was a widespread impression that monetary policy had become an easy job. Central banks had managed to win the battle against inflation, and the victory was seen as permanent. Low and stable inflation, in addition, was seen as a sufficient condition to contain cyclical fluctuations in the real economy. While low inflation has proven a stable asset, the expectation that the macroeconomy could grow along a steep and uninterrupted path has been proven too optimistic. We have discovered that what we thought to be paradise was in fact – at least to some extent – an illusion. Does this mean that central banks were left without resources when the crisis erupted? Certainly not! On the contrary, central banks’ actions were decisive in addressing many challenges raised by the crisis. The forceful response by central banks, especially in major advanced economies, involved unprecedented cuts in policy rates to levels close to zero and resorting to non-standard measures. Those non-standard measures included asset purchases and liquidity provision to the banking sectors to stabilise financial conditions. And in doing so, central banks averted even more serious declines in output in advanced economies’, thus supporting their ultimate goal of maintaining price stability. For its part, the ECB has acted forcefully and decisively in pursuing its price stability mandate. Like other central banks, we have deployed a host of standard and non-standard policy measures: We have reduced our key interest rates to unprecedented low levels and provided banks with unlimited liquidity for extended maturities against an expanded set of collateral. And at the nadir of the crisis, when we were confronted with rising concerns of a euro area break-up, we announced our Outright Monetary Transactions programme. These measures were instrumental in addressing risks to price stability and avoiding a scenario of more severe distress. Last month, the Governing Council decided on an additional set of measures aimed to provide further monetary policy accommodation, ease credit conditions and inject complementary liquidity. We lowered our key interest rates further, to a level that can be considered to be the effective lower bound. This cut implies that one of our three main policy rates is now in negative territory, an unprecedented move for a large currency area. Moreover, we announced a series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations aimed at relaxing lending conditions and ensuring that these low interest rates reach the real economy (TLTROs). The Governing Council complemented this measure on the liquidity side with the decision to continue the fixed rate tender procedures with full allotment for as long as necessary, and at least until December 2016. In addition, we decided to suspend the weekly fine-tuning operations sterilising the liquidity injected under the Securities Markets Programme, which was discontinued two years ago. These measures mutually reinforce each other. Together, they also underpin our forward guidance that key ECB interest rates will remain at present levels for an extended period of time. To understand better the Governing Council’s most recent decisions, one has to understand the particular challenges that we, as monetary policy makers, are currently facing in the euro area. These challenges will be the focus of my talk today. Concretely, I would like to focus on three main challenges. The first challenge concerns the possible risks and implications associated with a prolonged period of low inflation. I will focus on the driving forces of current low inflation and discuss how monetary policy can best address risks to price stability in this environment. The second challenge concerns the effectiveness of our standard monetary policy measures in steering inflation in line with our medium-term price stability objective. With monetary policy rates at their effective lower bound, the financing conditions for sovereigns, banks and large corporates have become rather favourable. However, our accommodative monetary policy stance appears not to feed through to lending rates for households and smaller firms. This impairment in the bank lending channel creates its own challenges for monetary policy. The third challenge is of longer-term nature and goes beyond recent monetary policy decisions. As the on-going recovery remains moderate despite substantial policy support, some observers have recently pointed to the risk of long-term economic stagnation, not just for the euro area but also for some other advanced economies. The term “secular stagnation” has been applied to this phenomenon, meaning a persistent state of economic depression in which the natural interest rate – the real interest rate consistent with output at potential and/or stable inflation – has become negative. I will briefly elaborate on this risk as well as on the implications for monetary policy and other policies. Let me start with the first challenge namely the risks associated to a prolonged period of low inflation. Over the past years, we have seen a pronounced decline in inflation rates. Inflation stood at 3.0% in late 2011, and has dropped since then to a mere half percent in May 2014. It is fair to say that a decline of this magnitude was not anticipated, neither in the prices of financial assets nor in the forecasts of international economic institutions. To give you an example, Eurosystem staff inflation projections for 2014 were revised significantly downwards over the recent months. In December 2013, Eurosystem staff projected HICP inflation at 1.1% for 2014. In the most recent projection round of June 2014 – that is, about six months later – inflation was expected to be only 0.7% in 2014. Indeed, inflation developments continue to disappoint: In the first quarter of 2014 we saw HICP inflation at only 0.7%. For June 2014, Eurostat reported a flash estimate of 0.5% which would imply an inflation rate of 0.6% for the second quarter of 2014. Looking further ahead, there is little momentum in inflation dynamics. In fact, inflation is expected to remain at rather moderate levels. Pipeline pressures on headline inflation remain subdued and sluggish labour cost growth puts little pressure on inflation. The latest June 2014 macroeconomic projections of Eurosystem staff, therefore, see HICP inflation edging only slowly upwards to 1.1% in 2015 and 1.4% in 2016. The Governing Council’s focal point of aiming at inflation rates below, but close to, 2% in the medium term has to be seen in a symmetric way: Inflation rates above and below this focal point are a matter of concern for us. The subdued inflation outlook provides little safety margin against unexpected adverse shocks that may give rise to downside risks to price stability. Inflation rates are thus outside of what we consider as a “zone of comfort”.One may argue that disinflation is in itself not necessarily problematic. Indeed, low prices may boost the purchasing power of consumers, especially if this is driven by improvements in a country’s terms of trade, like a decline in commodity prices. Moreover, in certain stressed countries, the on-going disinflation reflects in part the first successes of structural adjustments. This constitutes a prerequisite for regaining competitiveness. Competitive disinflation can be beneficial, as suggested by the experience of some European countries in the past. At the same time, a prolonged period of low inflation creates risks. For one, it makes the on-going relative price adjustments more difficult. Perhaps more perniciously, if the period becomes too prolonged there is a heightened risk that inflation expectations become unanchored. Assessing these risks requires a clear understanding of the drivers of inflation developments. Or put differently, one should be wary of concentrating too mechanically on inflation observations, without also assessing the underlying forces that explain those observations. Looking at recent developments, the decline in inflation from 3.0% to 0.5% in about two and a half years has been to a large extent driven by the contribution of food and energy prices. In fact, the energy component alone accounted for around half of the decline in overall inflation. In general, the optimal monetary policy response to risks to price stability depends on the specific nature of the shock. For a wide variety of shocks – such as demand shocks – a prompt reaction will not only preserve price stability but will also stabilise the economy. For instance, a negative global demand shock pushes down both inflation and growth. Here, a decisive monetary policy stimulus helps to stabilise output and inflation at the same time – there is no trade-off between the two. But for other types of shocks, such as supply shocks, a trade-off may occur between stabilising inflation and stabilising growth, requiring a different monetary policy response. For instance, a positive oil supply shock exerts downward pressures on prices but goes along with an expansion of real activity. Lower energy prices boost real disposable incomes. The downward drift of inflation away from the focal point of just below 2% would warrant additional accommodation. But at the same time, a monetary policy stimulus would bring output further away from its sustainable level. Hence, in the case of supply shocks, like a decline in energy prices, a gradual response is appropriate both to avoid unnecessarily high volatility in real activity and to maintain price stability over a longer horizon. Here, monetary policy should be more inclined to look through temporary deviations from the price stability definition and wait until the impact of the fall in energy prices on overall inflation subsides.However, this distinction of monetary policy responses according to the nature of shocks may become blurred the more permanent supply shocks become. In this case, they can morph into demand shocks via second-round effects. For example, a series of negative energy price shocks may not only push down inflation over a prolonged period, but may feed into people’s expectations of future inflation. In this case, households and firms would adjust their price and wage setting behaviour. And, against the background of subdued inflation expectations, households may postpone their expenditure plans. Aggregate demand falls as a result. The reason is that, as a result of the lower expected inflation, the real interest rate increases, thus giving rise to downward inflation pressures that are typically associated with tight monetary policy conditions. In other words, when a sustained string of positive supply side shocks is allowed to pass through into inflation expectations, the shocks mutate into demand shocks. In these circumstances, the policy recommendation differs from the case of a standard supply shock: as in the case of negative demand shocks, monetary policy should provide additional accommodation to ensure that inflation expectations remain anchored. Therefore, it is crucial to assess whether such second-round effects are likely to occur. In the current euro area context of low inflation, a persistent undershooting of our inflation objective could in fact introduce greater “backward-lookingness” into the formation of inflation expectations – that is dependence on past inflation. In other words, inflation expectations could become more unanchored if agents start attaching more weight to past inflation in their assessment of future inflation. To illustrate that point, let me refer to the Phillips curve relationship that links current inflation to its past outcomes, the central bank’s inflation objective and a measure of economic slack. In that framework a de-anchoring of inflation expectations would lead to a downward shift of the Phillips curve. The downward shift means that the Phillips curve would predict lower inflation for an unchanged level of slack. Lower inflation expectations can thereby exert a pronounced “gravitational pull” that keeps inflation low despite a moderate recovery under way and a gradual reabsorption of unutilised capacity. What is our assessment of the risk of inflation expectations becoming unanchored in the euro area? Let me emphasise three elements. First, long-term inflation expectations based on surveys remain in line with our focal point for price stability, but market expectations for inflation have fallen. Market participants seem to factor in a longer period of low inflation. Since summer 2012, following movements in HICP inflation, market-based measures of inflation expectations have been on a declining trend. In particular, declines have been observed in shorter-term inflation expectations. At this juncture, market-based inflation expectations suggest a rather slow increase in inflation over the next years.Second, the decline in inflation is broad-based across sectors. HICP inflation has oscillated between 1.0% and 0.5% since last October. But the same holds when excluding the volatile components like energy, food, alcohol and tobacco. Such a measure of core inflation has also been bound between 1.0% and 0.7% since last October. Low inflation is also broad-based across countries. Looking at the three euro area countries with the highest HICP inflation record in May, we see inflation rates of just 1.4% in Luxemburg and 1.0% in Finland and Slovenia. Hence, low inflation is not only a challenge that concerns few individual euro area economies; it concerns the euro area as a whole. Third, these downward movements of current and expected inflation occur in an environment characterised by already weak demand. The recovery is too moderate to push inflation decisively back to our focal point for price stability on its own. According to the latest ECB staff projections, real GDP is expected to increase by 1.0% in 2014, 1.7% in 2015 and 1.8% in 2016. Hence, the adverse shock to inflation will not correct itself easily. A continued accommodative monetary policy stance is therefore necessary to maintain price stability. It is against this background that the Governing Council decided last month on the package of mutually reinforcing measures to further strengthen the degree of monetary policy accommodation. We lowered the interest rate on the main refinancing operations to 0.15% and the rate on the marginal lending facility to 0.40%. The rate on the deposit facility was lowered to -0.10%. Furthermore, we continued our forward guidance and clarified that that key ECB interest rates will remain at present levels for an extended period of time.As part of the set of measures, it is our objective for this rate cut to stimulate activity through improved borrowing conditions. It should also provide incentives to banks to lend to other banks, rather than deposit excess liquidity with the Eurosystem. The fact that with the negative deposit facility rate banks now have to pay money for such deposits may be particular relevant in that respect. The lower deposit facility rate also prevents a compression of the interest rate corridor. Such a compression could negatively affect money market activity as banks lack incentives to actively manage their liquidity position. Thus the reduction in the deposit facility rate should also contribute to reducing the persisting fragmentation in cross-border lending in euro area money markets. Overall, the lower rates will contribute to an appropriate monetary policy stance and thereby aim to ensure our objective of maintaining price stability. Let me move to the second challenge: As long as we are below our focal point for inflation over the medium term, we want to ensure that our measures are effective in pushing inflation back to our medium-term price stability objective and that they are transmitted smoothly and quickly through the economy. This is especially important when approaching the lower bound on interest rates. How does this apply to current circumstances? Under normal circumstances, a reduction in our key policy rates is translated relatively smoothly to financing conditions across different euro area countries. Certainly, we have seen improvements in overall market financing conditions. These improvements are apparent, for example, in the sharp compression of credit spreads across various markets for fixed-income credit. Yet bank lending conditions for the real economy remain tight. In a bank-based financial system like the euro area, this creates a significant drag on the effectiveness with which we can steer inflation outcomes via standard monetary policy measures.Let me explain first how I see the bank lending situation, and second how I interpret it. First, lending volumes are still subpar. Loan growth to euro area non-financial corporations has been in negative territory since mid-2012. While the rate of contraction has stabilised somewhat since mid-2013, ECB internal analyses based on several alternative models show that the growth rate of loans in the first quarter of 2014 remains below a level consistent with credit demand determinants. This assessment is shared across the four larger euro area economies. In Spain in particular we observe a large discrepancy between the actual and the counterfactual scenario for loans extended to the manufacturing sector. Second, lending rates have not declined in line with improvements in financial markets. Lending conditions for SMEs remain particularly challenging in Spain and Italy. Customers in these countries face sustained high bank lending rates for small loans, standing on average between one and two percentage points above comparable rates in Germany. While these lending rates reflect credit risk, which has increased in these economies, this is not entirely a passive variable. Indeed, lending rates can themselves become a propagator and amplifier of economic distress. On a macroeconomic level, borrower’s credit risk is endogenous. It depends on macroeconomic outcomes and, crucially, on the prevailing lending rate itself. High lending rates contribute to higher loan delinquencies; and in equilibrium, higher delinquencies justify high lending rates ex post. The result may be a mutually reinforcing spiral of high lending rates, high credit risk and poor macroeconomic outcomes.We see some signs of this: borrowers with similar risk profile are being charged higher lending rates if located in a stressed country, pointing to the continued impairment of the bank lending channel in these countries. To sum up, bank credit flows to firms – particularly small ones – are disappointing. There is always a lag between corporate bank financing and the economic cycle, but data increasingly reinforce the hypothesis that this lag is greater in this recovery than in past episodes. Bank lending rates have also not declined sufficiently smoothly and uniformly. In fact, financing costs have barely improved in some countries, despite significant reductions in policy rates. Against this background, it is clear that the impaired bank lending channel is impeding the monetary policy impulse from policy rate reductions from being transmitted efficiently to the wider economy. It thus constitutes a drag on the recovery of output and prices. In general, when monetary policy transmission is impaired, there may be a case for the central bank to directly address it. This is particularly so if the impairment is related to liquidity problems of banks, something that central banks are well equipped to address. This is why the ECB adopted many non-standard measures aimed at strengthening monetary policy transmission at a time when interest rates were still far away from the effective lower bound. When approaching the effective lower bound on interest rate, however, one could argue that the focus on repairing the transmission channel becomes even more justified. This is because muted policy transmission can no longer be compensated through a stronger signal – that is, more forceful cuts in policy rates.In this context, the Governing Council decided last month to adopt several credit easing measures – by which I mean, measures aimed at ensuring that the accommodative policy stance is translated into a corresponding easing in credit conditions. In particular, these measures include a series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) aimed at easing credit conditions. The TLTROs are expected to ease overly tight lending conditions, lower lending rates and stimulate credit volumes through several channels. The first and most important channel is through a reduction in term funding costs for banks. Funding relief, however, does not per se guarantee better credit conditions for banks’ customers, unless the supply of loans shifts in parallel and lending mark-ups are kept constant or even pushed down. This is why the targeted nature of the TLTRO is important: by making funding relief conditional on generation of new lending volumes, the TLTRO will encourage a shift outward in the credit supply curve. By simply moving along the demand schedule, this outward shift will reduce the price for lending while increasing new loans. If banks do not manage to exceed a certain benchmark in terms of net lending, they will not benefit from the TLTRO. This shows that the TLTROs are indeed targeted, rather than a broad-based unconditional provision of liquidity as in the case of the earlier 3-year LTROs.Second, the TLTROs are expected to increase excess liquidity, which reduces interest rates in the short-term money market. Remember that banks take into account the risk-free yield curve when pricing their loans. This curve depends in turn on the expected evolution of the short-term, i.e. money market, interest rate curve. By keeping the money market base rate stable at compressed levels, the TLTROs will reinforce the lowering of the ECB’s key interest rates. Third, by partially substituting for term funding in the market for bank bonds, the TLTROs can create a scarcity of investible assets, which will result in lower yields and easier market funding conditions even for banks that have not taken part in the operations. It may also create spillover effects to other segments of the corporate credit market, thereby lowering yields on various securities beyond the initial impact. The latter mechanism is not dissimilar to the “portfolio balance channel”. [3] Through these combined effects, we believe that a widespread use of this facility has the potential to halt the vicious circle of constrained lending, weak macroeconomic conditions and elevated loan delinquencies, and re-ignite a positive “credit multiplier” process. Our credit easing package will provide an effective and well-targeted response to impaired bank lending, which we see as a significant factor holding back the economic recovery. Those euro area banks that have already strengthened their balance sheets will be able to make full use of its benefits. The TLTROs will also be attractive for banks making efforts to turn around their past lending trends. Faced with a still fragile recovery and weak credit dynamics, our credit easing package, combined with the rate cuts and the ancillary liquidity measures adopted at last month’s meeting, constitutes an effective response tailored to the specific challenges that may jeopardise the recovery. It will contribute to safeguarding medium-term price stability in the euro area. That being said, monetary policy needs to be aware of the potential implications that a protracted period of monetary accommodation may have for financial stability. There are two major risks: first, postponement in bank balance sheet repair; and second, bubbles in asset prices.The first risk is that cheap funding allows banks to back-load the deleveraging of their balance sheets. After a financial crisis, banks have to undergo a thorough clean-up. Otherwise, they may continue to roll over legacy loans, thus restricting the resources available for new lending in support of the real economy – so-called “ever-greening”. [4] This risk is being countered through the ECB’s on-going comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance sheets – consisting of the asset quality review and a stress test – which will be completed roughly in parallel with the launch of the first TLTRO. Thus, banks will not be able to benefit from funding relief without also repairing their balance sheets where necessary. The design of the measures should also limit to some extent the second risk to financial stability, the build-up of bubbles. The TLTROs exclude explicitly loans to households for house purchases. Furthermore, credit developments are always closely monitored when the assessment from the economic analysis is cross-checked with the signals coming from the monetary analysis, the two pillars of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. Thus, concerns that the measure could stoke a housing bubble seem unwarranted. Nonetheless, it is important to keep in mind the distinction between what monetary policy can and should do, and what is the domain of macro-prudential policy. Monetary policy has the clear primary objective to maintain price stability in the euro area over the medium-term. Macro-prudential measures should be used, if needed, to smooth the financial cycle in specific sectors or jurisdictions. Let me turn to the third and final challenge: the risk of protracted low growth. We are now more than five years after Lehman, and we see financial conditions normalising in advanced economies. Yet, in many countries, there are no signs of a strong recovery in growth or a fast catching-up processes, such as one would expect in normal upswings – and despite monetary policy remaining accommodative. To explain this apparent contradiction, some observers have pointed to the risk of secular stagnation, arguing in particular that advanced economies such as the US have been trapped in a persistent state of economic depression in which the natural interest rate – the real interest rate consistent with output at potential and/or stable inflation – has become negative. [5] A negative natural rate could reflect reduced demand for debt-financed investment, declining rates of population growth, changes in the distribution of income leading to a higher propensity to save, or a trend towards an accumulation of larger foreign exchange reserves by central banks in many regions. In this configuration, it is argued that the lower bound on nominal interest rates and low inflation constrain monetary policy from generating sufficiently negative real interest rates to stimulate demand and match saving and investment. In other words, the economy enters a liquidity trap in which monetary policy becomes ineffective in the presence of a lower bound on nominal returns.Against this background, some observers have advocated that central banks increase their inflation objective to guard against the risk of hitting the zero lower bound in the future. [6] Let me say upfront that this proposal seems to me ill-advised. Price stability has been a difficult terrain to conquer and it took us considerable time and efforts to do so. The costs of higher inflation certainly outweigh the hypothetical benefits of raising inflation targets. And one important lesson of the crisis is that central banks have a large set of instruments at their disposal to deliver their objective, even when approaching the zero lower bound. Having said that, how does the secular stagnation hypothesis apply to the euro area perspective? It is true that the on-going rebalancing process in the euro area – and the associated shifts in the relative supply of private savings and demand for loans – will tend to affect the natural interest rate. In particular, downward pressures can be expected from increased saving and supply of funds as public and private balance sheets are strengthened. In terms of demand for funds, investment has fallen during the crisis as a result of increased risk aversion and a decline in the measured rate of return, which also exerts downward pressures on real interest rates. That said, I would not take this process as a firm signal of future economic stagnation. Recoveries after financial crises following a long period of excessive leverage and debt build-up are typically slower than after normal business cycles. [7] The process of balance sheet repair tends to weigh on demand expansion for debt-constrained households and sectors in the post-crisis phase. At the same time, other less indebted sectors experience a more pronounced rebound. All in all, these developments result in a subdued growth pattern until the unwinding of the debt overhang in some sectors has been fully achieved. Expectations of long-term growth in the euro area, which drive the prospective return on investment and, in turn, investment decisions, remain positive. For example, the latest Consensus Forecast survey point to longer-term estimates of GDP growth for the period 6 to10 years ahead of about 1.5%. Finally, let me stress that the natural rate of interest is not observable and its estimation is subject to uncertainty. This calls for caution when interpreting the data. The simplest and most direct way to measure the natural interest rate is market expectations for the future level of the real risk-free interest rate. However, market-based measures suffer from significant shortcomings. In particular, they are exposed to bouts of optimism or pessimism disconnected from fundamentals and they tend to be distorted by time-varying premia. At present, reflecting the strongly accommodative stance of monetary policy, various measures of longer-term term premia have turned negative. Thus, we see various factors affecting the level of long term real interest rates, some temporary and some more persistent. But the case supporting the hypothesis of economic stagnation is in my view not settled. Let me be clear on one important point: in case further risks to price stability were to emerge the Governing Council stands ready to use all tools available to deliver its mandate. If required, we will act swiftly with further monetary policy easing to address possible risks to price stability. The Governing Council is unanimous in its commitment to using also unconventional instruments within its mandate should it become necessary to further address risks to price stability. Yet, while monetary policy can provide support, especially through non-standard measures, to overcome the risk of secular stagnation, the underlying causes of low growth are structural and need to be addressed by other policy areas. This is visible in the relatively weak estimates of potential output growth for the euro area. The on-going structural, fiscal and financial sector policy reform should lead to a rebalancing of saving and investment over the medium-term accompanied by a stronger demand for investment and therefore a higher natural rate of interest. But there is clearly considerable scope to raise potential growth in the euro area even further given the relative inflexibility of product and labour markets and the incompletion of the single market. A concerted process of structural reform, continuing the progress made in recent years, would tend to raise investment demand by increasing expectations of future productivity and thereby making larger set of investment projects profitable. Creating new opportunities through a reduction in entry barriers into specific areas, such as highly regulated service sectors, or by increasing the scope for cross-border projects would support also investment incentives. Let me conclude. The good news is that the euro area is on a gradual but nevertheless fragile recovery path. But we face important challenges. First, inflation has declined to very low level and is expected to come back to levels close to 2% only very gradually. Here, we have to ensure that these developments do not become entrenched in inflation expectations, which can pose a threat to our primary objective to maintain price stability. Second, while financial market conditions are improving, our accommodative monetary policy does not reach the real economy evenly. Credit conditions for SMEs in particular are still tight and access to credit is limited. Third, and more generally, we need to be mindful of possible risks of falling into a regime of long-term economic stagnation, if not countered by appropriate policies. Although the role of monetary policy is clearly limited in this context, a scenario of secular stagnation entails important potential challenges for monetary policy. In June, the Governing Council decided a package of measures to provide additional monetary stimulus and support lending to the real economy. The upcoming TLTRO is an important element in our strategy to deliver on our price stability mandate. It is meant to provide an attractive means of refinancing for banks to ease credit conditions and spur new lending. In this way, banks can play their part in providing sufficient financing to the real economy and help return the euro area economy to sustainable long-term growth and employment. [1]I would like to thank Jan Felix Hammermann and Arthur Saint-Guilhem for their contribution in the preparation of this speech.[2]See Issing, Otmar (2012), “Central Banks – Paradise Lost”, CFS Working paper, No. 2012/06. [3]The existence of a “portfolio balance channel” has been extensively discussed recently in the context of the Fed’s large scale asset purchases. There is a vast literature assessing empirically the portfolio balance channel in that context. See, for example, Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache and Brian Sack (2011), “The Financial Market Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchases”, International Journal of Central Banking 7 (1), pp. 3-43. [4]See Caballero, Ricardo J., Takeo Hoshi and Anil K. Kashyap (2008), “Zombie Lending and Depressed Restructuring in Japan”, American Economic Review 98 (5), pp. 1943-1977.[5]See Summers, Lawrence H. (2014), “U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound”, Business Economics Vol. 49, No. 2, pp. 65-73. [6]See Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Aricia and Paolo Mauro (2010), “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy”, IMF Staff Position Note SPN/10/03. See also Paul Krugman (2014), “Inflation Targets Reconsidered”, draft paper for ECB Sintra conference, May 2014. [7]See Rajan, Raghuram (2013), “A step in the dark: unconventional monetary policy after the crisis”, Andrew Crockett Memorial lecture. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",dear presid snower dear professor lehment ladi gentlemen real pleasur today year mark centenari kiel institut world economi past year kiel institut contribut thought debat press econom polici issu germani europ global economi becom one lead independ think tank world chose truli interest challeng topic year summer school reassess monetari polici past six year monetari polici firm spotlight central banker normal use financi crisi import consequ central bank monetari polici particular financi stabil consider far present central bank today still reassess sound view somewhat strong would argu principl sound monetari polici remain larg unchang chang particular environ monetari polici oper measur need combat risk price stabil predecessor otmar iss dub lost paradis recal year preced start crisi time socal great moder widespread impress monetari polici becom easi job central bank manag win battl inflat victori seen perman low stabl inflat addit seen suffici condit contain cyclic fluctuat real economi low inflat proven stabl asset expect macroeconomi could grow along steep uninterrupt path proven optimist discov thought paradis fact least extent illus mean central bank left without resourc crisi erupt certain contrari central bank action decis address mani challeng rais crisi forc respons central bank especi major advanc economi involv unpreced cut polici rate level close zero resort nonstandard measur nonstandard measur includ asset purchas liquid provis bank sector stabilis financi condit central bank avert even serious declin output advanc economi thus support ultim goal maintain price stabil part ecb act forc decis pursu price stabil mandat like central bank deploy host standard nonstandard polici measur reduc key interest rate unpreced low level provid bank unlimit liquid extend matur expand set collater nadir crisi confront rise concern euro area breakup announc outright monetari transact programm measur instrument address risk price stabil avoid scenario sever distress last month govern council decid addit set measur aim provid monetari polici accommod eas credit condit inject complementari liquid lower key interest rate level consid effect lower bound cut impli one three main polici rate negat territori unpreced move larg currenc area moreov announc seri target longerterm refinanc oper aim relax lend condit ensur low interest rate reach real economi tltros govern council complement measur liquid side decis continu fix rate tender procedur full allot long necessari least decemb addit decid suspend week finetun oper sterilis liquid inject secur market programm discontinu two year ago measur mutual reinforc togeth also underpin forward guidanc key ecb interest rate remain present level extend period time understand better govern council recent decis one understand particular challeng monetari polici maker current face euro area challeng focus talk today concret would like focus three main challeng first challeng concern possibl risk implic associ prolong period low inflat focus drive forc current low inflat discuss monetari polici best address risk price stabil environ second challeng concern effect standard monetari polici measur steer inflat line mediumterm price stabil object monetari polici rate effect lower bound financ condit sovereign bank larg corpor becom rather favour howev accommod monetari polici stanc appear feed lend rate household smaller firm impair bank lend channel creat challeng monetari polici third challeng longerterm natur goe beyond recent monetari polici decis ongo recoveri remain moder despit substanti polici support observ recent point risk longterm econom stagnat euro area also advanc economi term secular stagnat appli phenomenon mean persist state econom depress natur interest rate real interest rate consist output potenti andor stabl inflat becom negat briefli elabor risk well implic monetari polici polici let start first challeng name risk associ prolong period low inflat past year seen pronounc declin inflat rate inflat stood late drop sinc mere half percent may fair say declin magnitud anticip neither price financi asset forecast intern econom institut give exampl eurosystem staff inflat project revis signific downward recent month decemb eurosystem staff project hicp inflat recent project round june six month later inflat expect inde inflat develop continu disappoint first quarter saw hicp inflat june eurostat report flash estim would impli inflat rate second quarter look ahead littl momentum inflat dynam fact inflat expect remain rather moder level pipelin pressur headlin inflat remain subdu sluggish labour cost growth put littl pressur inflat latest june macroeconom project eurosystem staff therefor see hicp inflat edg slowli upward govern council focal point aim inflat rate close medium term seen symmetr way inflat rate focal point matter concern us subdu inflat outlook provid littl safeti margin unexpect advers shock may give rise downsid risk price stabil inflat rate thus outsid consid zone comfort one may argu disinfl necessarili problemat inde low price may boost purchas power consum especi driven improv countri term trade like declin commod price moreov certain stress countri ongo disinfl reflect part first success structur adjust constitut prerequisit regain competit competit disinfl benefici suggest experi european countri past time prolong period low inflat creat risk one make ongo relat price adjust difficult perhap pernici period becom prolong heighten risk inflat expect becom unanchor assess risk requir clear understand driver inflat develop put differ one wari concentr mechan inflat observ without also assess under forc explain observ look recent develop declin inflat two half year larg extent driven contribut food energi price fact energi compon alon account around half declin overal inflat general optim monetari polici respons risk price stabil depend specif natur shock wide varieti shock demand shock prompt reaction preserv price stabil also stabilis economi instanc negat global demand shock push inflat growth decis monetari polici stimulus help stabilis output inflat time tradeoff two type shock suppli shock tradeoff may occur stabilis inflat stabilis growth requir differ monetari polici respons instanc posit oil suppli shock exert downward pressur price goe along expans real activ lower energi price boost real dispos incom downward drift inflat away focal point would warrant addit accommod time monetari polici stimulus would bring output away sustain level henc case suppli shock like declin energi price gradual respons appropri avoid unnecessarili high volatil real activ maintain price stabil longer horizon monetari polici inclin look temporari deviat price stabil definit wait impact fall energi price overal inflat subsid howev distinct monetari polici respons accord natur shock may becom blur perman suppli shock becom case morph demand shock via secondround effect exampl seri negat energi price shock may push inflat prolong period may feed peopl expect futur inflat case household firm would adjust price wage set behaviour background subdu inflat expect household may postpon expenditur plan aggreg demand fall result reason result lower expect inflat real interest rate increas thus give rise downward inflat pressur typic associ tight monetari polici condit word sustain string posit suppli side shock allow pass inflat expect shock mutat demand shock circumst polici recommend differ case standard suppli shock case negat demand shock monetari polici provid addit accommod ensur inflat expect remain anchor therefor crucial assess whether secondround effect like occur current euro area context low inflat persist undershoot inflat object could fact introduc greater backwardlooking format inflat expect depend past inflat word inflat expect could becom unanchor agent start attach weight past inflat assess futur inflat illustr point let refer phillip curv relationship link current inflat past outcom central bank inflat object measur econom slack framework deanchor inflat expect would lead downward shift phillip curv downward shift mean phillip curv would predict lower inflat unchang level slack lower inflat expect therebi exert pronounc gravit pull keep inflat low despit moder recoveri way gradual reabsorpt unutilis capac assess risk inflat expect becom unanchor euro area let emphasis three element first longterm inflat expect base survey remain line focal point price stabil market expect inflat fallen market particip seem factor longer period low inflat sinc summer follow movement hicp inflat marketbas measur inflat expect declin trend particular declin observ shorterterm inflat expect junctur marketbas inflat expect suggest rather slow increas inflat next year second declin inflat broadbas across sector hicp inflat oscil sinc last octob hold exclud volatil compon like energi food alcohol tobacco measur core inflat also bound sinc last octob low inflat also broadbas across countri look three euro area countri highest hicp inflat record may see inflat rate luxemburg finland slovenia henc low inflat challeng concern individu euro area economi concern euro area whole third downward movement current expect inflat occur environ characteris alreadi weak demand recoveri moder push inflat decis back focal point price stabil accord latest ecb staff project real gdp expect increas henc advers shock inflat correct easili continu accommod monetari polici stanc therefor necessari maintain price stabil background govern council decid last month packag mutual reinforc measur strengthen degre monetari polici accommod lower interest rate main refinanc oper rate margin lend facil rate deposit facil lower furthermor continu forward guidanc clarifi key ecb interest rate remain present level extend period time part set measur object rate cut stimul activ improv borrow condit also provid incent bank lend bank rather deposit excess liquid eurosystem fact negat deposit facil rate bank pay money deposit may particular relev respect lower deposit facil rate also prevent compress interest rate corridor compress could negat affect money market activ bank lack incent activ manag liquid posit thus reduct deposit facil rate also contribut reduc persist fragment crossbord lend euro area money market overal lower rate contribut appropri monetari polici stanc therebi aim ensur object maintain price stabil let move second challeng long focal point inflat medium term want ensur measur effect push inflat back mediumterm price stabil object transmit smooth quick economi especi import approach lower bound interest rate appli current circumst normal circumst reduct key polici rate translat relat smooth financ condit across differ euro area countri certain seen improv overal market financ condit improv appar exampl sharp compress credit spread across various market fixedincom credit yet bank lend condit real economi remain tight bankbas financi system like euro area creat signific drag effect steer inflat outcom via standard monetari polici measur let explain first see bank lend situat second interpret first lend volum still subpar loan growth euro area nonfinanci corpor negat territori sinc mid rate contract stabilis somewhat sinc mid ecb intern analys base sever altern model show growth rate loan first quarter remain level consist credit demand determin assess share across four larger euro area economi spain particular observ larg discrep actual counterfactu scenario loan extend manufactur sector second lend rate declin line improv financi market lend condit smes remain particular challeng spain itali custom countri face sustain high bank lend rate small loan stand averag one two percentag point compar rate germani lend rate reflect credit risk increas economi entir passiv variabl inde lend rate becom propag amplifi econom distress macroeconom level borrow credit risk endogen depend macroeconom outcom crucial prevail lend rate high lend rate contribut higher loan delinqu equilibrium higher delinqu justifi high lend rate ex post result may mutual reinforc spiral high lend rate high credit risk poor macroeconom outcom see sign borrow similar risk profil charg higher lend rate locat stress countri point continu impair bank lend channel countri sum bank credit flow firm particular small one disappoint alway lag corpor bank financ econom cycl data increas reinforc hypothesi lag greater recoveri past episod bank lend rate also declin suffici smooth uniform fact financ cost bare improv countri despit signific reduct polici rate background clear impair bank lend channel imped monetari polici impuls polici rate reduct transmit effici wider economi thus constitut drag recoveri output price general monetari polici transmiss impair may case central bank direct address particular impair relat liquid problem bank someth central bank well equip address ecb adopt mani nonstandard measur aim strengthen monetari polici transmiss time interest rate still far away effect lower bound approach effect lower bound interest rate howev one could argu focus repair transmiss channel becom even justifi mute polici transmiss longer compens stronger signal forc cut polici rate context govern council decid last month adopt sever credit eas measur mean measur aim ensur accommod polici stanc translat correspond eas credit condit particular measur includ seri target longerterm refinanc oper tltros aim eas credit condit tltros expect eas over tight lend condit lower lend rate stimul credit volum sever channel first import channel reduct term fund cost bank fund relief howev per se guarante better credit condit bank custom unless suppli loan shift parallel lend markup kept constant even push target natur tltro import make fund relief condit generat new lend volum tltro encourag shift outward credit suppli curv simpli move along demand schedul outward shift reduc price lend increas new loan bank manag exceed certain benchmark term net lend benefit tltro show tltros inde target rather broadbas uncondit provis liquid case earlier year ltros second tltros expect increas excess liquid reduc interest rate shortterm money market rememb bank take account riskfre yield curv price loan curv depend turn expect evolut shortterm e money market interest rate curv keep money market base rate stabl compress level tltros reinforc lower ecb key interest rate third partial substitut term fund market bank bond tltros creat scarciti invest asset result lower yield easier market fund condit even bank taken part oper may also creat spillov effect segment corpor credit market therebi lower yield various secur beyond initi impact latter mechan dissimilar portfolio balanc channel combin effect believ widespread use facil potenti halt vicious circl constrain lend weak macroeconom condit elev loan delinqu reignit posit credit multipli process credit eas packag provid effect welltarget respons impair bank lend see signific factor hold back econom recoveri euro area bank alreadi strengthen balanc sheet abl make full use benefit tltros also attract bank make effort turn around past lend trend face still fragil recoveri weak credit dynam credit eas packag combin rate cut ancillari liquid measur adopt last month meet constitut effect respons tailor specif challeng may jeopardis recoveri contribut safeguard mediumterm price stabil euro area said monetari polici need awar potenti implic protract period monetari accommod may financi stabil two major risk first postpon bank balanc sheet repair second bubbl asset price first risk cheap fund allow bank backload deleverag balanc sheet financi crisi bank undergo thorough cleanup otherwis may continu roll legaci loan thus restrict resourc avail new lend support real economi socal evergreen risk counter ecb ongo comprehens assess bank balanc sheet consist asset qualiti review stress test complet rough parallel launch first tltro thus bank abl benefit fund relief without also repair balanc sheet necessari design measur also limit extent second risk financi stabil buildup bubbl tltros exclud explicit loan household hous purchas furthermor credit develop alway close monitor assess econom analysi crosscheck signal come monetari analysi two pillar ecb monetari polici strategi thus concern measur could stoke hous bubbl seem unwarr nonetheless import keep mind distinct monetari polici domain macroprudenti polici monetari polici clear primari object maintain price stabil euro area mediumterm macroprudenti measur use need smooth financi cycl specif sector jurisdict let turn third final challeng risk protract low growth five year lehman see financi condit normalis advanc economi yet mani countri sign strong recoveri growth fast catchingup process one would expect normal upsw despit monetari polici remain accommod explain appar contradict observ point risk secular stagnat argu particular advanc economi us trap persist state econom depress natur interest rate real interest rate consist output potenti andor stabl inflat becom negat negat natur rate could reflect reduc demand debtfinanc invest declin rate popul growth chang distribut incom lead higher propens save trend toward accumul larger foreign exchang reserv central bank mani region configur argu lower bound nomin interest rate low inflat constrain monetari polici generat suffici negat real interest rate stimul demand match save invest word economi enter liquid trap monetari polici becom ineffect presenc lower bound nomin return background observ advoc central bank increas inflat object guard risk hit zero lower bound futur let say upfront propos seem illadvis price stabil difficult terrain conquer took us consider time effort cost higher inflat certain outweigh hypothet benefit rais inflat target one import lesson crisi central bank larg set instrument dispos deliv object even approach zero lower bound said secular stagnat hypothesi appli euro area perspect true ongo rebalanc process euro area associ shift relat suppli privat save demand loan tend affect natur interest rate particular downward pressur expect increas save suppli fund public privat balanc sheet strengthen term demand fund invest fallen crisi result increas risk avers declin measur rate return also exert downward pressur real interest rate said would take process firm signal futur econom stagnat recoveri financi crise follow long period excess leverag debt buildup typic slower normal busi cycl process balanc sheet repair tend weigh demand expans debtconstrain household sector postcrisi phase time less indebt sector experi pronounc rebound develop result subdu growth pattern unwind debt overhang sector fulli achiev expect longterm growth euro area drive prospect return invest turn invest decis remain posit exampl latest consensus forecast survey point longerterm estim gdp growth period year ahead final let stress natur rate interest observ estim subject uncertainti call caution interpret data simplest direct way measur natur interest rate market expect futur level real riskfre interest rate howev marketbas measur suffer signific shortcom particular expos bout optim pessim disconnect fundament tend distort timevari premia present reflect strong accommod stanc monetari polici various measur longerterm term premia turn negat thus see various factor affect level long term real interest rate temporari persist case support hypothesi econom stagnat view settl let clear one import point case risk price stabil emerg govern council stand readi use tool avail deliv mandat requir act swift monetari polici eas address possibl risk price stabil govern council unanim commit use also unconvent instrument within mandat becom necessari address risk price stabil yet monetari polici provid support especi nonstandard measur overcom risk secular stagnat under caus low growth structur need address polici area visibl relat weak estim potenti output growth euro area ongo structur fiscal financi sector polici reform lead rebalanc save invest mediumterm accompani stronger demand invest therefor higher natur rate interest clear consider scope rais potenti growth euro area even given relat inflex product labour market incomplet singl market concert process structur reform continu progress made recent year would tend rais invest demand increas expect futur product therebi make larger set invest project profit creat new opportun reduct entri barrier specif area high regul servic sector increas scope crossbord project would support also invest incent let conclud good news euro area gradual nevertheless fragil recoveri path face import challeng first inflat declin low level expect come back level close gradual ensur develop becom entrench inflat expect pose threat primari object maintain price stabil second financi market condit improv accommod monetari polici reach real economi even credit condit smes particular still tight access credit limit third general need mind possibl risk fall regim longterm econom stagnat counter appropri polici although role monetari polici clear limit context scenario secular stagnat entail import potenti challeng monetari polici june govern council decid packag measur provid addit monetari stimulus support lend real economi upcom tltro import element strategi deliv price stabil mandat meant provid attract mean refinanc bank eas credit condit spur new lend way bank play part provid suffici financ real economi help return euro area economi sustain longterm growth employ would like thank felix hammermann arthur saintguilhem contribut prepar speech see iss otmar central bank paradis lost cfs work paper exist portfolio balanc channel extens discuss recent context fed larg scale asset purchas vast literatur assess empir portfolio balanc channel context see exampl gagnon matthew raskin juli remach sack financi market effect feder reserv largescal asset purchas intern journal central bank pp see caballero ricardo j takeo hoshi anil k kashyap zombi lend depress restructur japan american econom review pp see summer lawrenc h u econom prospect secular stagnat hysteresi zero lower bound busi econom vol pp see blanchard olivi giovanni dell aricia paolo mauro rethink macroeconom polici imf staff posit note spn see also paul krugman inflat target reconsid draft paper ecb sintra confer may see rajan raghuram step dark unconvent monetari polici crisi andrew crockett memori lectur reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en