José Manuel González-Páramo: The sovereign debt crisis and the future of European integration,24-11-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,4521,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen, Thank you very much for inviting me to speak here this evening in the “City of Dreaming Spires”. The aims of the Oxford University European Affairs Society – fostering understanding of political, social and cultural issues across Europe – have never been more relevant than today. In the sovereign debt crisis, Europe faces one of its greatest ever challenges. The question is how to confront it. We should learn from the present and the recent past. And we should look forward, since future prosperity in Europe depends on our collective success in overcoming the crisis. Citizens in both creditor and debtor countries have to look beyond national interests. Ultimately, this can only be sustained through deeper common understanding and stronger sense of what it means to be European. The sovereign debt crisis will be the theme of my remarks today. I do not want to engage in the minutiae of the issue or signal any particular policy stance by the ECB. Instead, I would like to take a step back from the crisis and reflect on what it has taught us so far about economic and monetary union in Europe. Obviously, I concentrate explicitly on the euro area, i.e. the seventeen countries sharing the single currency. The status and role of the United Kingdom, the dynamics of the British domestic debate on Europe, and the cooperation with the Continent in addressing the crisis are not the focus of my remarks. I have three main propositions. First, membership of EMU entails much deeper policy changes than were originally realised. In 1991, Hans Tietmeyer, the former President of the Bundesbank, remarked that “monetary union is not just a technical matter. It is in itself, to some extent, a political union”. What has become clear is that countries that adopt the euro as their currency are required to adjust fundamentally the way in which they conduct their economic and financial policies. At the same time, ensuring overall stability requires far-reaching coordination in economic and financial governance. It would be difficult to understand that in the world’s second largest monetary area governance is outsourced solely to the markets and ratings agencies. Effective governance of an economic area of such importance requires much closer economic and financial union. Second, in response to the crisis, a much more radical change in euro area governance has taken place than many observers seem to acknowledge. Europe tends to reform incrementally, at times creating frustration at the pace of change. But those increments now add up to a fundamental overhaul of its economic management. The reasons this has not been more effective in calming the crisis are complex, but communication stands out among them: In “selling” their reforms, euro area authorities are forced to walk a tightrope between the expectations of national electorates and financial markets, and risk satisfying neither. The only solution to this democracy-market dialectic is, again, much closer economic and financial union.Third, and contrary to a strand of current thinking, the Treaty prohibition on monetary financing is supporting rather than threatening euro area integration. In the euro area, the central bank is “doubly removed” from the political systems of individual countries: it is not only constitutionally independent, but also elevated to the supranational level. Euro area governments cannot expect the ECB to finance public deficits. As a result, they must be commensurately more ambitious in their economic policies and more disciplined in their management of public finances to support their debt levels. Moreover, given the prohibition on monetary financing, having a banking sector which can support growth and provide adequate financing to the real economy in Europe requires a stronger regulatory and governance framework, so as to prevent negative feedback loops between banks and sovereigns. By forcing policymakers to focus their reform efforts on the right priorities the monetary financing prohibition offers an incentive to closer economic and financial union.Let me begin with my first proposition, that membership of EMU entails much deeper policy changes than were previously acknowledged. The crisis has shown very clearly that countries that adopt the euro have to alter the conduct of their economic policies. These changes are fundamental. Among them, three are particularly relevant.First, in a monetary union fiscal and supervisory authorities have to adopt policies that counteract the emergence of private financial imbalances at the national level. This is a consequence of the ECB’s legal obligation to maintain price stability in the euro area – defined as an inflation rate of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Private debts denominated in euros cannot be ‘inflated away’. Second, fiscal and other national macroeconomic policies have to ensure competitiveness by resisting increases in nominal trends. This is the implication of sharing an exchange rate; devaluation cannot be used as a tool for any one country to regain competitiveness. Benchmarking against other euro area countries is unavoidable.Third, fiscal authorities have to build up sufficient buffers in good times to withstand adverse conditions. This follows from the prohibition on monetary financing which prevents the central bank from directly financing governments as well as the so-called ‘no bail out clause’ of the Treaty which prohibits a Member State to assume the liabilities of another Member State. The failure to build adequate fiscal buffers during times of economic growth means that during recessions governments are forced to implement fiscal policies that are more pro-cyclical than would otherwise be the case. Some in this audience may respond that these policy requirements were evident to sharp-eyed observers. Indeed, the ECB had been making these points for many years. But they were not so widely acknowledged as to make a difference. For every economic argument in favour of policy adjustment, a contrary one could be found justifying the path taken. This meant many euro area countries did not internalise the policy requirements of monetary union. In fact, almost the opposite policies were pursued in some countries.The lack of an adequate regulatory and macro-prudential framework meant that in many economies the banking sector supported an unbalanced and unsustainable expansion of credit during the period of low interest rates. The financial sector also became over-leveraged and engaged in excessive risk taking. Although at the time many in the financial industry justified this with arguments about how financial engineering created possibilities for sophisticated risk diversification, a posteriori it has become evident that risk was seriously mispriced in the period before the crisis. National wage-setting and labour market regulatory frameworks have also proved to be inadequate. Rather than resisting nominal trends, before the crisis strong wages put pressure on price competitiveness, often justified by theories of catching-up effects. Fiscal discipline also proved too lax. Rather than building up buffers during ‘the good times’, increased tax revenues associated with the pre-crisis housing booms were treated as structural rather than cyclical, justified by models demonstrating new growth trends.Taken together, this meant that some of the euro area countries entered the global financial crisis in an unnecessarily vulnerable position. This explains to a large extent the situation we are now in.However, these policy failures were also made possible by a general failure to acknowledge the new governance responsibilities associated with membership of EMU. Put simply, “keeping your own house in order” is necessary, but not sufficient, in a highly integrated monetary union. It is the responsibility of every euro area government to exercise vigorous and effective mutual surveillance over others’ policies. As a crisis in a country like Greece representing only 2% of euro area GDP can become systemic, disregarding EMU governance may come at a high cost to taxpayers.Yet the latter was the attitude prevailing prior to the crisis. The Stability and Growth Pact – the set of EU level rules for guiding fiscal policies – was never properly implemented. Member States tended to adopt a principle of “non-interference” over each others’ policies. Peer pressure, on which the framework was predicated, gave way to peer support. By watering-down of SGP in 2004-05, the largest euro area countries signalled that they had no stake in the rules. This allowed a certain country to run deficits over 3% of GDP every year it was in EMU and never face corrective action.Moreover, the euro area surveillance framework was “blind in one eye”, with no formal framework for monitoring macroeconomic and financial imbalances. The Lisbon Strategy focused on the structural level, but on policy implementation rather than imbalances. Eurogroup discussions on imbalances had no enforcement mechanism. The Lamfalussy framework for financial supervision did not use the concept of systemic risk. Thus a situation prevailed where countries could be congratulated for strong headline fiscal numbers when these data in fact reflected substantial imbalances that were building up in the private sector. To a certain extent, the weakness of these governance procedures was linked to a misplaced faith in market discipline. The institutional design of EMU gave market discipline a central role in economic governance. The absence of a transfer mechanism between Member States was supposed to encourage markets to actively discriminate between euro area issuers. This was based on the assumption that financial markets would always have perfect incentives to enforce the “rules of the game”. This assumption, in retrospect, looks somewhat naïve. It is well established in the academic literature that markets have complex incentives and dynamics. Market psychology tends towards pro-cyclicality. Perceptions converge around certain information sources, such as ratings, or certain benchmarks, such as indices, which creates herd behaviour. Structural features of the financial system, such as the role of ratings in financial regulation and investment mandates, create an embedded non-linearity in market reactions to news.What we witnessed in the euro area, therefore, was not a rigorous analysis of sovereign risks but rather an undershooting followed by a dramatic, and perhaps excessive, correction. Spreads converged for all euro area countries before 2008, despite high debt levels in some countries and clear evidence of emerging imbalances. Now we have moved to the opposite extreme: some euro area countries are confronting phenomena like sudden stops and buyers’ strikes that were in the past associated only with emerging markets.As we have seen in recent months, market discipline can be a strong and useful force in encouraging countries to make long-needed reforms. But it is also, clearly, an unstable way to ensure good policies. Reform decisions have to be made hastily in dramatic meetings. Politicians lack time to explain the need for reform to their constituencies and build consensus behind them. It may even be the case that countries have to go “too far, too fast” to restore market confidence. There is also a serious risk of uncontrollable contagion to other countries. In other words, we cannot completely delegate governance to financial markets. The euro area is the world’s second largest monetary area. It cannot depend solely on the opinions of ratings agencies and markets. It needs economic governance arrangements that are preventive and linear. This underscores my central point that a much more comprehensive approach to economic governance is now the priority for the euro area. And this means more economic and financial integration for the euro area, with a significant transfer of sovereignty to the EMU level over fiscal, structural and financial policies. Europe has responded to these policy, governance and market failures by undergoing a multi-year process of institutional reform. This leads me to my second proposition: that a much more radical change in euro area governance has taken place than many observers seem to acknowledge. There is a tendency to see the euro area response to the crisis as perennially behind-the-curve – as “too little, too late”. I concede that national authorities have not always been effective in stabilising financial conditions. But I also think this assessment lacks an appropriate benchmark. Observers expect a new “silver bullet” every few months and when one is not delivered, they are disappointed.But if we choose a more appropriate benchmark – say, the euro area in 2009 – a quite different picture emerges. The sum of the incremental steps taken since that date are, in fact, now a very big step.Take for example economic governance. The EU Council and European Parliament have agreed on a legislative package that significantly limits the discretion of national authorities, even when imposing sanctions on themselves. This includes a framework for monitoring a wide range of macroeconomic imbalances, also backed by sanctions. Countries are expected to anchor fiscal prudence in national rules, creating a much more “vertically integrated” concept of governance. All these measures were unthinkable four years ago.If we look at the conclusions of Euro Summit on 26 October – dismissed by some observers as insufficient – we see even more radical steps envisaged for the future. Euro area countries have committed to adopt balanced budget rules. They have agreed to base their budgets on independent growth forecasts. They have agreed to stick to the recommendations of the Commission when implementing the Stability and Growth Pact. Countries in the Excessive Deficit Procedure – which is currently 14 out of 17 euro area countries – will allow the Commission to examine draft national budgets and monitor budget execution. Although some of the recent governance reforms, like those that formed part of the so-called “Six-pack” proposed by the European Commission, fall short of the “quantum leap” that the ECB had long advocated for the euro area, they still represent significant progress relative to the situation prevailing before the crisis.The creation of the European Financial Stability Facility and future European Stability Mechanism could also not have been imagined in 2007. The euro area has institutionalised the provision of sovereign liquidity and agreed to a Treaty change to ensure its legality. As the new facilities have developed, they have acquired a range of tools. The current mandate of the EFSF not only allows it to extend temporary loans to euro area governments in need, but also to buy bonds in both the secondary and primary markets, to act on the basis of a precautionary programme and to finance bank recapitalisations through loans to governments including in non programme countries. The resources committed to the EFSF are substantial. The ESM, which will have a paid-in capital of €80 billion and callable capital of €620 billion, has a capital base around three times that of the European Investment Bank. At the 26 October Euro Summit euro area leaders also agreed on two schemes which will allow a significant leveraging of existing EFSF resources in order to increase the fund’s ability to act.But perhaps the most significant development, relative to past expectations, is the implementation of root-and-branch reform programmes in a number of euro area countries. One should not underestimate the significance of EU-IMF programmes for structural changes in some economies. They are dealing with long-needed pension reforms, opening up closed sectors of the economy, modernising public administration. In terms of collective economic management, this development goes further than many federations. Can we imagine, for example, the U.S. federal government requiring a similar depth of reform in California?Countries outside of EU-IMF programmes have also implemented major reforms. Spain has recently passed a constitutional balanced budget amendment, disproving the view that major policy changes are impossible in an election year. Italy has agreed to a technocratic government to ensure structural reforms are implemented, and invited the IMF to give extra credibility to this process. All euro area countries, except those under a programme, have committed themselves to bringing their budget deficits below 3% of GDP by 2013 at the latest. Overall, the forward commitments of euro area countries to fiscal sustainability go far beyond what has been agreed in the U.S. or Japan.Each of these measures, seen individually, may not represent the “shock-and-awe” or “big bazooka” that some commentators and markets participants call for. But when seen collectively, they represent a comprehensive broadening and deepening of euro area economic governance. And relative to a reasonable benchmark – the status quo ante – they are very significant developments.It is also worth noting that many steps have been taken to strengthen the financial sector regulation and supervision. Under the leadership of the G20, a remarkable amount of work has been done by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and the Basel Committee in a demanding timeframe. Profound regulatory reforms need to be implemented to address the underlying deficiencies that have become apparent in our financial system. In general, Europe is exceeding international benchmarks in implementing these reforms. The Commission issued a proposal in July 2011 aimed at transposing the Basel III framework into EU Law. By doing this, it is among the first to introduce the Basel III framework and is taking a leading role in delivering on the G20 commitments. In line with Basel III, the Commission’s proposal (so-called CRD IV) provides for higher minimum capital requirements, a stricter definition of eligible capital and more transparency. It also introduces also entirely new concepts, such as mandatory liquidity requirements and a non-risk-based leverage ratio.Beyond the micro-prudential dimension of regulation, the proposal introduces macro-prudential elements, most prominently the countercyclical capital buffer regime. This constitutes an important safeguard to protect the banking sector from periods of excessive aggregate credit growth. And on top of this, the European Council has recently decided that European banks need to have a 9% core tier one capital ratio by the middle of next year, instead of by 2018, as agreed by the Basel Committee. Other important regulatory initiatives are underway. These include the establishment of an appropriate regulatory framework for over-the-counter derivatives, enhanced oversight of Credit Rating Agencies, the prevention of systemic risk coming from the “shadow banking sector” and an EU crisis management framework for bank recovery and resolution. As regards the supervisory framework, a new system of financial supervision has been established creating, for the first time, European level macro-prudential supervision through the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB).This discussion raises an obvious question: if so much has been achieved since 2009, why have euro area authorities not been more effective in halting the crisis?In my view this is fundamentally a political question, related to making policy between 17 sovereign democracies. Unlike a unitary state, the euro area has 17 Heads of State, 17 Finance Ministers, and countless national parliamentarians. It can only be expected that their communication on difficult topics may sometimes diverge. As we have seen on many occasions, this triggers difficult feedback loops between politics and markets which ultimately undermine the impact of agreed policy measures. On one level this is a procedural problem: our institutions are not effective enough in ensuring political leaders speak with one voice. But on a deeper level, it is a problem deriving from the fundamentally different expectations of domestic populations and financial markets. Markets expect messages of confidence, of immediacy, of unlimited capacity to act. Domestic populations want to know the limits of their liability, to ensure that actions are just and fair, to make sure past mistakes are not repeated.A classic example of this divergence has been the debate over private sector involvement. For a domestic audience, banks should internalise the consequences of their lending decisions and should be punished for their past behaviour. But from a financial market perspective, such communication is disastrous. It signals to investors that assets that were previously risk-free are no longer so, that the euro area is a market where their investments are not guaranteed. And as markets are forward-looking, they sell their assets today. This immediately undermines the progress I have just described. A second example is the implementation of crisis response decisions. Markets expect quick, bold and “shock-and-awe” decisions on highly complex matters. They are exasperated that something can be agreed by leaders but take months to enter into force. Yet this is a necessary condition of operating in a system of 17 sovereign democracies. Decisions have to be explained, approval processes have to be followed, compromises have sometimes to be made. These dynamics were witnessed even in the US when Congress sent back the TARP in 2008. The net effect on the euro area, however, is that by the time decisions are eventually implemented the expectations of market have moved on. The impact of those decisions is then discounted. These market-democracy dialectics provide a second reason why a more integrated economic and financial union is so essential for EMU. The rationale for the original design of EMU – with centralised monetary policy, but decentralised economic policies – was linked to principles of subsidiarity and democratic accountability. This was consistent with the environment that prevailed 20 years ago. But these same principles now imply more Europe, not less.Subsidiarity is the principle that the centre should perform only those tasks which cannot be performed effectively at the national level. Can we really argue, in the current crisis, that the centre is not the more effective level to exercise, or at least coordinate, certain economic and financial policies? Democratic accountability is the principle that citizens should be able to hold their representatives responsible for decisions. If we need a stronger European centre, then to maintain this principle we also need profound improvements in democracy at the European level. The justification for rethinking these principles can be found, I believe, by acknowledging that membership of EMU entails a significant degree of political union. We have seen that preventing crises requires that all countries exercise close and effective mutual surveillance of each others’ policies. We have seen that correcting crises requires that decisions are taken jointly, with a euro area perspective. The need for institutionalised collective decision-making is, fundamentally, what defines a political union. And this is de facto the condition of all euro area countries.This condition of de facto political union raises questions about the proper role of the central bank in EMU. The ECB is very much in the focus at the moment. Some observers call for it to play the role of a “national” central bank like the Federal Reserve or the Bank of England, and emulate their policies. But these viewpoints are partial. They overlook what is my third proposition: that the Treaty prohibition on monetary financing by the ECB, over the medium term, is a force in favour of euro area integration and greater stability.The positive effects of the ECB’s policies are fairly obvious in the case of the banking sector. Our standard and non-standard measures ensure price stability in the euro area. While our standard measures signal the monetary policy stance, our non-standard measures ensure the transmission of the desired policy stance to the real economy in those market segments in which the transmission is impaired. Our non-standard measures ensure that despite increased liquidity demand, financial institutions are able to continue lending to clients.However, misconceptions persist related to the Securities Markets Programme, our programme for intervening in government bond markets. The SMP deliberately addresses the appropriate transmission of our monetary policy to the real economy in market segments which are impaired. Government bonds are crucial for the transmission of monetary policy, via their status as a benchmark for borrowing by banks. Put simply, left unaddressed, the malfunctioning of sovereign bond markets’ could block the bank lending channel. An important difference with Quantitative Easing programmes is that the liquidity injected into the banking system via the SMP is sterilised by the ECB through regular liquidity absorbing operations. The ECB has been widely recognised as an institution capable of timely, decisive and convincing action during tumultuous times. We see this as a mark of distinction. However, it would be erroneous to derive from this that it should be a political institution in charge of running the euro area economy. It cannot be and should not be. The ECB is a central bank, committed to its mandate to preserve price stability over the medium term. It is not the fiscal lender of last resort to sovereigns. Markets participants that call for the ECB to play this role may care only about the nominal value of their assets and the need to avoid losses. Whether or not the underlying asset – our currency as store of value – has been depreciated seems unimportant to them. But survey after survey shows that the people, the citizens of the euro area, want price stability. They care deeply about their purchasing power and the value of their savings. The ECB has been established with a clear mandate to meet these expectations.Moreover, what these calls for more activism overlook is the positive effects of the ECB’s stance over the medium term. There are some in the academic world that argue that one way out of the sovereign crisis would be for the central bank to act as a lender of last resort to the sovereign. These voices suggest that euro area countries are more vulnerable to liquidity stresses relative to the situation in economies where the central bank is supposedly prepared to backstop the government bond market. Certainly the ECB, as the central bank of all EMU countries jointly, cannot act as the central bank of specific countries. But is this in fact a disadvantage for Europe? In a sense, euro area countries have given up sovereignty over their national currency. This implies that maintaining their public debts at reasonable levels requires commensurately more convincing fiscal and economic policies. It also requires that they “tie their hands” in a credible manner through stronger and more automatic economic governance. The monetary financing prohibition, in this way, is a spur towards better policies and better governance – in other words, a closer economic union.Similarly, the monetary financing prohibition changes the relationship between sovereigns and their national banking systems. As sovereigns cannot monetise debt, they can only backstop large banking sectors at a cost to their own creditworthiness. Insofar as this may undermine the balance sheets of the banks they are trying to save, it could end up triggering a self-defeating vicious circle. This implies that the only viable route to support the euro area’s integrated financial sector is through a more integrated system of supervision and resolution. The monetary financing prohibition, by constraining the resources of individual sovereigns, pushes the euro area in the direction of collective solutions.Let me now draw to a close.The key theme that has run through my remarks today is that, from every perspective, much closer economic and financial union is essential for the euro area. We have had this demonstrated in the clearest possible terms by the financial and sovereign debt crises. We have already taken important steps in this direction. Europe is ahead of others in addressing its imbalances. The challenge looking forward is to complete the process towards closer union and not settle for the ‘quick fix’.The people of Europe want closer cooperation in economic and financial matters. Eurobarometer surveys find cross-country majorities in favour of closer cooperation to end the crisis. And this is ultimately unavoidable, given the state of political union between countries that monetary union de facto creates. It is now a time for politicians to be bold and courageous, to recognise these trends, and to complete as soon as possible the great project begun 60 years ago towards ‘ever closer union’.Thank you for your attention.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen thank much invit speak even citi dream spire aim oxford univers european affair societi foster understand polit social cultur issu across europ never relev today sovereign debt crisi europ face one greatest ever challeng question confront learn present recent past look forward sinc futur prosper europ depend collect success overcom crisi citizen creditor debtor countri look beyond nation interest ultim sustain deeper common understand stronger sens mean european sovereign debt crisi theme remark today want engag minutia issu signal particular polici stanc ecb instead would like take step back crisi reflect taught us far econom monetari union europ obvious concentr explicit euro area e seventeen countri share singl currenc status role unit kingdom dynam british domest debat europ cooper contin address crisi focus remark three main proposit first membership emu entail much deeper polici chang origin realis han tietmey former presid bundesbank remark monetari union technic matter extent polit union becom clear countri adopt euro currenc requir adjust fundament way conduct econom financi polici time ensur overal stabil requir farreach coordin econom financi govern would difficult understand world second largest monetari area govern outsourc sole market rate agenc effect govern econom area import requir much closer econom financi union second respons crisi much radic chang euro area govern taken place mani observ seem acknowledg europ tend reform increment time creat frustrat pace chang increment add fundament overhaul econom manag reason effect calm crisi complex communic stand among sell reform euro area author forc walk tightrop expect nation elector financi market risk satisfi neither solut democracymarket dialect much closer econom financi union third contrari strand current think treati prohibit monetari financ support rather threaten euro area integr euro area central bank doubli remov polit system individu countri constitut independ also elev supran level euro area govern cannot expect ecb financ public deficit result must commensur ambiti econom polici disciplin manag public financ support debt level moreov given prohibit monetari financ bank sector support growth provid adequ financ real economi europ requir stronger regulatori govern framework prevent negat feedback loop bank sovereign forc policymak focus reform effort right prioriti monetari financ prohibit offer incent closer econom financi union let begin first proposit membership emu entail much deeper polici chang previous acknowledg crisi shown clear countri adopt euro alter conduct econom polici chang fundament among three particular relev first monetari union fiscal supervisori author adopt polici counteract emerg privat financi imbal nation level consequ ecb legal oblig maintain price stabil euro area defin inflat rate close medium term privat debt denomin euro cannot inflat away second fiscal nation macroeconom polici ensur competit resist increas nomin trend implic share exchang rate devalu cannot use tool one countri regain competit benchmark euro area countri unavoid third fiscal author build suffici buffer good time withstand advers condit follow prohibit monetari financ prevent central bank direct financ govern well socal bail claus treati prohibit member state assum liabil anoth member state failur build adequ fiscal buffer time econom growth mean recess govern forc implement fiscal polici procycl would otherwis case audienc may respond polici requir evid sharpey observ inde ecb make point mani year wide acknowledg make differ everi econom argument favour polici adjust contrari one could found justifi path taken meant mani euro area countri internalis polici requir monetari union fact almost opposit polici pursu countri lack adequ regulatori macroprudenti framework meant mani economi bank sector support unbalanc unsustain expans credit period low interest rate financi sector also becam overleverag engag excess risk take although time mani financi industri justifi argument financi engin creat possibl sophist risk diversif posteriori becom evid risk serious mispric period crisi nation wageset labour market regulatori framework also prove inadequ rather resist nomin trend crisi strong wage put pressur price competit often justifi theori catchingup effect fiscal disciplin also prove lax rather build buffer good time increas tax revenu associ precrisi hous boom treat structur rather cyclic justifi model demonstr new growth trend taken togeth meant euro area countri enter global financi crisi unnecessarili vulner posit explain larg extent situat howev polici failur also made possibl general failur acknowledg new govern respons associ membership emu put simpli keep hous order necessari suffici high integr monetari union respons everi euro area govern exercis vigor effect mutual surveil other polici crisi countri like greec repres euro area gdp becom system disregard emu govern may come high cost taxpay yet latter attitud prevail prior crisi stabil growth pact set eu level rule guid fiscal polici never proper implement member state tend adopt principl noninterfer other polici peer pressur framework predic gave way peer support wateringdown sgp largest euro area countri signal stake rule allow certain countri run deficit gdp everi year emu never face correct action moreov euro area surveil framework blind one eye formal framework monitor macroeconom financi imbal lisbon strategi focus structur level polici implement rather imbal eurogroup discuss imbal enforc mechan lamfalussi framework financi supervis use concept system risk thus situat prevail countri could congratul strong headlin fiscal number data fact reflect substanti imbal build privat sector certain extent weak govern procedur link misplac faith market disciplin institut design emu gave market disciplin central role econom govern absenc transfer mechan member state suppos encourag market activ discrimin euro area issuer base assumpt financi market would alway perfect incent enforc rule game assumpt retrospect look somewhat naïv well establish academ literatur market complex incent dynam market psycholog tend toward procycl percept converg around certain inform sourc rate certain benchmark indic creat herd behaviour structur featur financi system role rate financi regul invest mandat creat embed nonlinear market reaction news wit euro area therefor rigor analysi sovereign risk rather undershoot follow dramat perhap excess correct spread converg euro area countri despit high debt level countri clear evid emerg imbal move opposit extrem euro area countri confront phenomena like sudden stop buyer strike past associ emerg market seen recent month market disciplin strong use forc encourag countri make longneed reform also clear unstabl way ensur good polici reform decis made hastili dramat meet politician lack time explain need reform constitu build consensus behind may even case countri go far fast restor market confid also serious risk uncontrol contagion countri word cannot complet deleg govern financi market euro area world second largest monetari area cannot depend sole opinion rate agenc market need econom govern arrang prevent linear underscor central point much comprehens approach econom govern prioriti euro area mean econom financi integr euro area signific transfer sovereignti emu level fiscal structur financi polici europ respond polici govern market failur undergo multiyear process institut reform lead second proposit much radic chang euro area govern taken place mani observ seem acknowledg tendenc see euro area respons crisi perenni behindthecurv littl late conced nation author alway effect stabilis financi condit also think assess lack appropri benchmark observ expect new silver bullet everi month one deliv disappoint choos appropri benchmark say euro area quit differ pictur emerg sum increment step taken sinc date fact big step take exampl econom govern eu council european parliament agre legisl packag signific limit discret nation author even impos sanction includ framework monitor wide rang macroeconom imbal also back sanction countri expect anchor fiscal prudenc nation rule creat much vertic integr concept govern measur unthink four year ago look conclus euro summit octob dismiss observ insuffici see even radic step envisag futur euro area countri commit adopt balanc budget rule agre base budget independ growth forecast agre stick recommend commiss implement stabil growth pact countri excess deficit procedur current euro area countri allow commiss examin draft nation budget monitor budget execut although recent govern reform like form part socal sixpack propos european commiss fall short quantum leap ecb long advoc euro area still repres signific progress relat situat prevail crisi creation european financi stabil facil futur european stabil mechan could also imagin euro area institutionalis provis sovereign liquid agre treati chang ensur legal new facil develop acquir rang tool current mandat efsf allow extend temporari loan euro area govern need also buy bond secondari primari market act basi precautionari programm financ bank recapitalis loan govern includ non programm countri resourc commit efsf substanti esm paidin capit billion callabl capit billion capit base around three time european invest bank octob euro summit euro area leader also agre two scheme allow signific leverag exist efsf resourc order increas fund abil act perhap signific develop relat past expect implement rootandbranch reform programm number euro area countri one underestim signific euimf programm structur chang economi deal longneed pension reform open close sector economi modernis public administr term collect econom manag develop goe mani feder imagin exampl u feder govern requir similar depth reform california countri outsid euimf programm also implement major reform spain recent pass constitut balanc budget amend disprov view major polici chang imposs elect year itali agre technocrat govern ensur structur reform implement invit imf give extra credibl process euro area countri except programm commit bring budget deficit gdp latest overal forward commit euro area countri fiscal sustain go far beyond agre u japan measur seen individu may repres shockandaw big bazooka comment market particip call seen collect repres comprehens broaden deepen euro area econom govern relat reason benchmark status quo ant signific develop also worth note mani step taken strengthen financi sector regul supervis leadership g remark amount work done financi stabil board fsb basel committe demand timefram profound regulatori reform need implement address under defici becom appar financi system general europ exceed intern benchmark implement reform commiss issu propos juli aim transpos basel iii framework eu law among first introduc basel iii framework take lead role deliv g commit line basel iii commiss propos socal crd iv provid higher minimum capit requir stricter definit elig capit transpar also introduc also entir new concept mandatori liquid requir nonriskbas leverag ratio beyond microprudenti dimens regul propos introduc macroprudenti element promin countercycl capit buffer regim constitut import safeguard protect bank sector period excess aggreg credit growth top european council recent decid european bank need core tier one capit ratio middl next year instead agre basel committe import regulatori initi underway includ establish appropri regulatori framework overthecount deriv enhanc oversight credit rate agenc prevent system risk come shadow bank sector eu crisi manag framework bank recoveri resolut regard supervisori framework new system financi supervis establish creat first time european level macroprudenti supervis european system risk board esrb discuss rais obvious question much achiev sinc euro area author effect halt crisi view fundament polit question relat make polici sovereign democraci unlik unitari state euro area head state financ minist countless nation parliamentarian expect communic difficult topic may sometim diverg seen mani occas trigger difficult feedback loop polit market ultim undermin impact agre polici measur one level procedur problem institut effect enough ensur polit leader speak one voic deeper level problem deriv fundament differ expect domest popul financi market market expect messag confid immediaci unlimit capac act domest popul want know limit liabil ensur action fair make sure past mistak repeat classic exampl diverg debat privat sector involv domest audienc bank internalis consequ lend decis punish past behaviour financi market perspect communic disastr signal investor asset previous riskfre longer euro area market invest guarante market forwardlook sell asset today immedi undermin progress describ second exampl implement crisi respons decis market expect quick bold shockandaw decis high complex matter exasper someth agre leader take month enter forc yet necessari condit oper system sovereign democraci decis explain approv process follow compromis sometim made dynam wit even us congress sent back tarp net effect euro area howev time decis eventu implement expect market move impact decis discount marketdemocraci dialect provid second reason integr econom financi union essenti emu rational origin design emu centralis monetari polici decentralis econom polici link principl subsidiar democrat account consist environ prevail year ago principl impli europ less subsidiar principl centr perform task cannot perform effect nation level realli argu current crisi centr effect level exercis least coordin certain econom financi polici democrat account principl citizen abl hold repres respons decis need stronger european centr maintain principl also need profound improv democraci european level justif rethink principl found believ acknowledg membership emu entail signific degre polit union seen prevent crise requir countri exercis close effect mutual surveil other polici seen correct crise requir decis taken joint euro area perspect need institutionalis collect decisionmak fundament defin polit union de facto condit euro area countri condit de facto polit union rais question proper role central bank emu ecb much focus moment observ call play role nation central bank like feder reserv bank england emul polici viewpoint partial overlook third proposit treati prohibit monetari financ ecb medium term forc favour euro area integr greater stabil posit effect ecb polici fair obvious case bank sector standard nonstandard measur ensur price stabil euro area standard measur signal monetari polici stanc nonstandard measur ensur transmiss desir polici stanc real economi market segment transmiss impair nonstandard measur ensur despit increas liquid demand financi institut abl continu lend client howev misconcept persist relat secur market programm programm interven govern bond market smp deliber address appropri transmiss monetari polici real economi market segment impair govern bond crucial transmiss monetari polici via status benchmark borrow bank put simpli left unaddress malfunct sovereign bond market could block bank lend channel import differ quantit eas programm liquid inject bank system via smp sterilis ecb regular liquid absorb oper ecb wide recognis institut capabl time decis convinc action tumultu time see mark distinct howev would erron deriv polit institut charg run euro area economi cannot ecb central bank commit mandat preserv price stabil medium term fiscal lender last resort sovereign market particip call ecb play role may care nomin valu asset need avoid loss whether under asset currenc store valu depreci seem unimport survey survey show peopl citizen euro area want price stabil care deepli purchas power valu save ecb establish clear mandat meet expect moreov call activ overlook posit effect ecb stanc medium term academ world argu one way sovereign crisi would central bank act lender last resort sovereign voic suggest euro area countri vulner liquid stress relat situat economi central bank suppos prepar backstop govern bond market certain ecb central bank emu countri joint cannot act central bank specif countri fact disadvantag europ sens euro area countri given sovereignti nation currenc impli maintain public debt reason level requir commensur convinc fiscal econom polici also requir tie hand credibl manner stronger automat econom govern monetari financ prohibit way spur toward better polici better govern word closer econom union similar monetari financ prohibit chang relationship sovereign nation bank system sovereign cannot monetis debt backstop larg bank sector cost creditworthi insofar may undermin balanc sheet bank tri save could end trigger selfdef vicious circl impli viabl rout support euro area integr financi sector integr system supervis resolut monetari financ prohibit constrain resourc individu sovereign push euro area direct collect solut let draw close key theme run remark today everi perspect much closer econom financi union essenti euro area demonstr clearest possibl term financi sovereign debt crise alreadi taken import step direct europ ahead other address imbal challeng look forward complet process toward closer union settl quick fix peopl europ want closer cooper econom financi matter eurobaromet survey find crosscountri major favour closer cooper end crisi ultim unavoid given state polit union countri monetari union de facto creat time politician bold courag recognis trend complet soon possibl great project begun year ago toward ever closer union thank attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en