Jürgen Stark: Fit for the future? Towards a lean and efficient public sector,23-03-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,2296,"<p> [Slide 1] When discussing fiscal policy challenges for Europe, the focus of central banks is usually on the need for adequate fiscal consolidation, an appropriate fiscal stance, and measures to guarantee the long-term sustainability of public finances. And provided that expenditures are adequately met by revenues, central banks rarely intervene on issues related to the “performance” and “efficiency” of the public sector. This is perhaps not surprising. Central banks today are independent institutions that are rightly kept at arms length from the political process. And there is an obvious risk that any criticism of how much governments spend and how well they spend it will be interpreted as political interference rather than helpful advice. Yet, public sector performance and efficiency are important for economic growth and fiscal sustainability. If public spending is inefficient, then resources that could otherwise be put to better uses are wasted and productivity suffers. Moreover, all public spending needs to be financed: either by taxation, which increases distortions in the economy, or by borrowing, which implies higher deficit and debt levels. These are issues that are also very important for the functioning of the EMU and for central banks. So from our perspective, when considering challenges for fiscal policy it is relevant to ask whether the objectives of public spending are appropriate; and whether public spending is achieving its objectives in an efficient manner. I therefore very much welcome the theme of this conference. And I would like to take this opportunity to reflect a little on the core objectives of government and on the slightly provocative question of how much money is actually needed to attain them.  [Slide 2] As far as the objectives of government are concerned, Adam Smith set out his views on the role of the state in the Wealth of Nations. According to Smith, the state should be responsible for: “erecting and maintaining those public institutions and those public works, which, though they may be in the highest degree advantageous to a great society, are … of such a nature, that the profit could never repay the expense to any individual or small number of individuals”. Smith was of course describing what public economists today would refer to as the provision of public goods. But it is clear, that in Smith’s mind, such goods were very limited in scope. He referred to those necessary for “ facilitating the commerce of the society, and those for promoting the instruction of the people”; in other words, essentially, the rule of law (i.e. public administration, police, judiciary), basic infrastructure (e.g. roads and railways), defence, and education. And I think most people in this room would agree with me that basic social safety nets and healthcare provision should also be included in this list. As far as his views on the state’s role in the provision of education are concerned, Smith was clearly ahead of his time. For more than a century after he wrote the Wealth of Nations the role and objectives of government remained very limited indeed. [Slide 3] Before the 1st World War, total government expenditure typically counted for only around 10-15% of GDP. By 1960 this had risen to, on average, around 30% of GDP. This reflected the build up of public administrations, the spread of public education and the establishment of basic social welfare systems. The most dramatic and rapid rise in public spending, however, took place in the following two decades as governments took on ever more spending commitments and built up extensive welfare states. By the 1980s, many governments were spending around 50% of their country’s GDP.  [Slide 4] Confidence in the effectiveness of state intervention during the early post war period was encapsulated in the work of Richard Musgrave who identified three broad objectives for fiscal policy: allocation (which effectively refers to the provision of public goods already mentioned), stabilisation and redistribution. The Musgravian objectives of fiscal policy have remained pretty standard to this day. But enthusiasm for attaining these objectives via big government was soon challenged and has since waned. In particular Hayek and Buchanan warned about an overbearing state undermining economic incentives and freedom. They argued in favour of refocusing the role of government on its core tasks, mainly to provide a framework of rules for well-functioning markets, with appropriate incentives and opportunities for wealth creation. And these views have gradually gained credence since the post war boom came to an end in the 1970s. In most countries today, we find ourselves in a situation where the role of fiscal policy remains subject to (an often heated) debate. Government spending, including its redistribute share, has to be compatible with if not support economic freedom and a vibrant, growth creating private sector. This can best be attained by focusing government activities on core objectives, and by attaining these in the most cost-effective and incentive compatible manner. [Slide 5] Yet comparisons of government spending reveal considerable variations in terms of experiences across countries. Today, among the industrialised countries, public spending as a percentage of GDP ranges from the high twenties in Korea and the mid 30s in countries such as Australia and the United States to the mid 50s in Denmark and Sweden. Most euro area economies find themselves in the upper half of this range, but even within the euro area expenditure-to-GDP ratios currently range from as low as 34% in Ireland to as high as 54% in France.  [Slide 6] So clearly governments vary considerably in terms of how much they spend to meet their economic and social objectives. This may often reflect the cumulative effect of decades of political economy biases towards higher spending. Many governments are elected on platforms which include commitments to boost investment spending, to increase spending on public transport, or to raise the proportion of GDP spent on health, research and development, education, income re-distribution, etc. Finance ministries are often asked to accommodate these wishes as much as possible even if they do not want to. Believe me, from my own past, I know what I am talking about…But this creates a risk that spending commitments simply accumulate over time without proper cost-benefit analysis and prioritisation. Thankfully, there is now a growing interest in analysing the quality and effectiveness of public spending. This conference bears witness to this fact. As we have seen in some of the contributions this morning, in order to assess how effective public spending actually is, it is necessary to compare “inputs” in terms of spending with “outputs” in terms of performance. And when we compare inputs and outputs and ask ourselves whether higher spending does lead to better outcomes, the answer is somewhat ambiguous: in some cases it does, but not always. Often more - or at least the same - could be achieved at less cost.Let us take the example of education. [Slide 7] This chart plots average educational achievement in the year 2000 against education spending by various governments during the 1990s. To be more precise, “education achievement” here refers to a simple coverage of reading, mathematics and science scores as reported in the OECD / PISA [1] report of 2000. Of course this is just one measure which like any measure of public sector performance is not perfect. But nonetheless, comparing such measures against spending ratios is quite illustrative. In this case, at first glance there does seem to be a positive, albeit a rather weak, correlation between public spending on education and education performance. But clearly, more spending does not always lead to better outcomes. The biggest education spenders, namely Denmark and Norway only had an average performance according to this measure. The best performer, Japan, was one of the countries which spent the least. And the Netherlands and the UK were also doing well in the education league despite spending only around 5% of GDP, compared to 7% or 8% in the higher spending countries [Slide 8] A similar picture emerges as regards the objective of redistribution. This chart plots the average level of social transfers against the income share of the poorest 40% of households during the 1990s. Certainly, the rather high level of social transfers, equal to around 20% of GDP in Denmark, Finland and Sweden did help to create a more even income distribution in these countries. But Japan and Norway achieved similar results despite spending only 10% and 15% of GDP on social transfers respectively. Meanwhile, with a similarly high level of transfers, France did not have a particularly equal income distribution. So clearly, the relationship between spending and performance is not straightforward. It is not how much you spend but how you spend it that counts! We know how much governments do spend, but how much do they actually “need” to spend in order to achieve a good public sector performance? Or to put it another way, how little could they get away with spending while still maintaining a high performance by international standards?One way of coming up with an approximate answer to this question is to do a little exercise as follows. For each of the main spending categories or objectives of government, we can identify those countries which appear to achieve their objectives efficiently. In other words, we select those countries that are “good performers” but also “low spenders” in terms of the amount of public money that they devote to a particular objective. We can then add up the respective spending ratios, to arrive at a figure for “optimal” or “efficient” overall spending as a percentage of GDP. As far as the provision of public goods and services is concerned, we have already covered the area of education and transfers. In order to arrive at an overall figure for public consumption, we probably have to add about another 10% of GDP for purchases of other goods and services. This would be consistent with the relatively low spending levels in countries such as Japan, New Zealand, or Switzerland, which nonetheless tend to do well in terms of such indicators as the quality of the administration or the judiciary.  [Slide 9] And turning to infrastructure, we find that Austria, Canada, Switzerland and Sweden are all considered to have among the best communications and transport networks while spending around 2-3% of GDP on public investment.  [Slide 10] Adding these numbers up, we arrive at a figure for primary spending of around 30% of GDP that should be sufficient to still be amongst the best performers in terms of economic and social objectives amongst advanced economies. And if we add debt service to this, we arrive at a figure for total government spending of somewhere between 30% and 35% of GDP. Now clearly this exercise is a stylised one with several limitations. In particular, one could contest that if a country performs well in a certain area while spending relatively little, this may reflect exogenous factors that are not easily transferable across countries. For example, if there is a negative correlation between the quality of public infrastructure and public investment, this may be because some countries have already built their transport and communications networks, while others are still building theirs. And of course, in some countries, public spending may be lower because the private sector plays a greater role in the provision of services. Nonetheless, in my view it is a useful exercise to have some kind of benchmark in terms of how large – or I should say “how small” - an efficient public sector could be while still providing high quality public services.  [Slide 11] The German EU-Presidency has decided to devote an entire conference to discussing the quality of public finances and the efficiency of the public sector. This is very praiseworthy and in itself seems to acknowledge that what the public sector does and how much it spends must be challenged to improve the results.For many years, European countries have been able to maintain economic and social models which implied rather high levels of taxation and public spending. But there are increasingly signs that such high levels of spending can have detrimental medium- and long-term economic effects especially on growth and fiscal sustainability. If Europe wants to be dynamic and competitive in the 21st century, then it needs a well functioning market economy that is able to adapt quickly to change. But it is not clear that we can have such an economy while the state continues to absorb almost half of the economy’s resources. In today’s global economy, we need an adequate social safety net. We need a social system that serves as a springboard for higher employment and growth. We should have reasonably low taxes that allow us to remain globally competitive; not only to keep our capital but also a motivated and dynamic work force. And we should have efficient spending that attains core social and economic objectives, but leaves us money to adapt to new challenges (such as globalisation and climate change) and maintain a high quality of life. I would argue that 30-35% of GDP may be enough for this and it would certainly be easier to finance than the current levels of spending in many countries.Let me conclude with a small analogy regarding the political economy of change. Some 60 million years ago, the earth was ruled by very impressive, very strong, very large reptiles. But then something happened, there was an external shock to the environment and the dinosaurs became extinct. Smaller, more nimble animals, the mammals were better able to adapt. They survived and prospered. European governments need to choose whether they want to become the economic dinosaurs or rather the mammals of tomorrow! A number of countries, also here in Europe, have already demonstrated that ambitious expenditure reforms are possible. Their success is too compelling to be missed. I am confident we will go the route of the mammals rather than the dinosaurs.[1] Programme for International Student AssessmentReproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",slide discuss fiscal polici challeng europ focus central bank usual need adequ fiscal consolid appropri fiscal stanc measur guarante longterm sustain public financ provid expenditur adequ met revenu central bank rare interven issu relat perform effici public sector perhap surpris central bank today independ institut right kept arm length polit process obvious risk critic much govern spend well spend interpret polit interfer rather help advic yet public sector perform effici import econom growth fiscal sustain public spend ineffici resourc could otherwis put better use wast product suffer moreov public spend need financ either taxat increas distort economi borrow impli higher deficit debt level issu also import function emu central bank perspect consid challeng fiscal polici relev ask whether object public spend appropri whether public spend achiev object effici manner therefor much welcom theme confer would like take opportun reflect littl core object govern slight provoc question much money actual need attain slide far object govern concern smith set view role state wealth nation accord smith state respons erect maintain public institut public work though may highest degre advantag great societi natur profit could never repay expens individu small number individu smith cours describ public economist today would refer provis public good clear smith mind good limit scope refer necessari facilit commerc societi promot instruct peopl word essenti rule law e public administr polic judiciari basic infrastructur e g road railway defenc educ think peopl room would agre basic social safeti net healthcar provis also includ list far view state role provis educ concern smith clear ahead time centuri wrote wealth nation role object govern remain limit inde slide st world war total govern expenditur typic count around gdp risen averag around gdp reflect build public administr spread public educ establish basic social welfar system dramat rapid rise public spend howev took place follow two decad govern took ever spend commit built extens welfar state mani govern spend around countri gdp slide confid effect state intervent earli post war period encapsul work richard musgrav identifi three broad object fiscal polici alloc effect refer provis public good alreadi mention stabilis redistribut musgravian object fiscal polici remain pretti standard day enthusiasm attain object via big govern soon challeng sinc wane particular hayek buchanan warn overbear state undermin econom incent freedom argu favour refocus role govern core task main provid framework rule wellfunct market appropri incent opportun wealth creation view gradual gain credenc sinc post war boom came end countri today find situat role fiscal polici remain subject often heat debat govern spend includ redistribut share compat support econom freedom vibrant growth creat privat sector best attain focus govern activ core object attain costeffect incent compat manner slide yet comparison govern spend reveal consider variat term experi across countri today among industrialis countri public spend percentag gdp rang high twenti korea mid countri australia unit state mid denmark sweden euro area economi find upper half rang even within euro area expendituretogdp ratio current rang low ireland high franc slide clear govern vari consider term much spend meet econom social object may often reflect cumul effect decad polit economi bias toward higher spend mani govern elect platform includ commit boost invest spend increas spend public transport rais proport gdp spent health research develop educ incom redistribut etc financ ministri often ask accommod wish much possibl even want believ past know talk creat risk spend commit simpli accumul time without proper costbenefit analysi prioritis thank grow interest analys qualiti effect public spend confer bear wit fact seen contribut morn order assess effect public spend actual necessari compar input term spend output term perform compar input output ask whether higher spend lead better outcom answer somewhat ambigu case alway often least could achiev less cost let us take exampl educ slide chart plot averag educ achiev year educ spend various govern precis educ achiev refer simpl coverag read mathemat scienc score report oecd pisa report cours one measur like measur public sector perform perfect nonetheless compar measur spend ratio quit illustr case first glanc seem posit albeit rather weak correl public spend educ educ perform clear spend alway lead better outcom biggest educ spender name denmark norway averag perform accord measur best perform japan one countri spent least netherland uk also well educ leagu despit spend around gdp compar higher spend countri slide similar pictur emerg regard object redistribut chart plot averag level social transfer incom share poorest household certain rather high level social transfer equal around gdp denmark finland sweden help creat even incom distribut countri japan norway achiev similar result despit spend gdp social transfer respect meanwhil similar high level transfer franc particular equal incom distribut clear relationship spend perform straightforward much spend spend count know much govern spend much actual need spend order achiev good public sector perform put anoth way littl could get away spend still maintain high perform intern standard one way come approxim answer question littl exercis follow main spend categori object govern identifi countri appear achiev object effici word select countri good perform also low spender term amount public money devot particular object add respect spend ratio arriv figur optim effici overal spend percentag gdp far provis public good servic concern alreadi cover area educ transfer order arriv overal figur public consumpt probabl add anoth gdp purchas good servic would consist relat low spend level countri japan new zealand switzerland nonetheless tend well term indic qualiti administr judiciari slide turn infrastructur find austria canada switzerland sweden consid among best communic transport network spend around gdp public invest slide ad number arriv figur primari spend around gdp suffici still amongst best perform term econom social object amongst advanc economi add debt servic arriv figur total govern spend somewher gdp clear exercis stylis one sever limit particular one could contest countri perform well certain area spend relat littl may reflect exogen factor easili transfer across countri exampl negat correl qualiti public infrastructur public invest may countri alreadi built transport communic network other still build cours countri public spend may lower privat sector play greater role provis servic nonetheless view use exercis kind benchmark term larg say small effici public sector could still provid high qualiti public servic slide german eupresid decid devot entir confer discuss qualiti public financ effici public sector praiseworthi seem acknowledg public sector much spend must challeng improv result mani year european countri abl maintain econom social model impli rather high level taxat public spend increas sign high level spend detriment medium longterm econom effect especi growth fiscal sustain europ want dynam competit st centuri need well function market economi abl adapt quick chang clear economi state continu absorb almost half economi resourc today global economi need adequ social safeti net need social system serv springboard higher employ growth reason low tax allow us remain global competit keep capit also motiv dynam work forc effici spend attain core social econom object leav us money adapt new challeng globalis climat chang maintain high qualiti life would argu gdp may enough would certain easier financ current level spend mani countri let conclud small analog regard polit economi chang million year ago earth rule impress strong larg reptil someth happen extern shock environ dinosaur becam extinct smaller nimbl anim mammal better abl adapt surviv prosper european govern need choos whether want becom econom dinosaur rather mammal tomorrow number countri also europ alreadi demonstr ambiti expenditur reform possibl success compel miss confid go rout mammal rather dinosaur programm intern student assessmentreproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en