Jean-Claude Trichet: The successful entry of Cyprus into the euro area,18-01-2008,European Central Bank,ECB,1202,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,It is a great pleasure for me to attend this conference celebrating your adoption of the euro. Let me first congratulate all parties involved in the successful cash changeover that took place at the beginning of the year. It has been going smoothly. None of this would have been possible without the excellent performance of the Cypriot economy during the convergence process. Today’s euro celebrations are the result of the successful macroeconomic policies that the Cypriot authorities have pursued in recent years. Cyprus has made significant progress in both nominal and real convergence, owing to successful policies – namely, well-managed monetary and exchange rate policies combined with a range of structural reforms. In the last decade, HICP inflation in Cyprus has been contained, averaging 2.2% in 2007, with the only exceptions being in 2000 and 2003, when inflation rose mainly because of increases in energy prices as well as VAT harmonisation. Short-term as well as long-term interest rates have followed a declining trend in recent years to levels in line with those of the euro area as a whole. This suggests that market participants have confidence in Cyprus’s macroeconomic and fiscal developments as well as in its monetary and exchange rate policies. The process of nominal convergence has been accompanied by robust economic growth. Real GDP growth in Cyprus has been well above that in the euro area in recent years. Real output growth has been underpinned by domestic demand, and in particular by strong private consumption and, importantly, by strong fixed capital formation. Cyprus’s GDP per capita (in PPP terms) progressed from around 74% of the 1996 average of the 12 countries which initially joined the euro area to around 84% in 2006: this is a significant improvement, and may it continue that way. In spite of its remarkable progress towards nominal and real convergence, Cyprus has not experienced major imbalances: price and cost competitiveness developments have been favourable since 2004. The fiscal balance (the deficit-to-GDP ratio) has been improving since 2004 and stood at -1.2% of GDP in 2006. Looking at the financial side, Cyprus is experiencing substantial financial deepening, which has been reflected in robust credit activity. Although this process accompanies and supports economic development, it should be carefully monitored, particularly because it is taking place at a very rapid pace. Membership of the Exchange Rate Mechanism II (ERM II) was another element in Cyprus’s successful convergence. The pound-euro exchange rate at which Cyprus joined the ERM II in May 2005 remained very stable throughout the period of ERM II participation. The EU Council decided that the central parity should also become the final conversion rate of the pound to the euro.Let me also say that the ECB has established excellent working relations with the Central Bank of Cyprus over the last couple of years. The Governor of the Central Bank of Cyprus has been a member of the General Council of the ECB since May 2004. As from mid-2007, Governor Orphanides attended the meetings of the Governing Council as an observer, and on 1 January 2008 he became an official member of that decision-making body for monetary policy in the euro area. The ECB and the Central Bank of Cyprus, together with the National Changeover Board, the European Commission and national and international authorities cooperated closely in many ways to prepare the introduction of the euro. The euro information campaigns played a vital role here. The ECB together with the Central Bank of Cyprus made sure that Cypriots became familiar with the euro banknotes and coins. The information campaigns consisted of an optimal communication mix that drew on the experience of the communication campaign in 2002, when euro cash was introduced in 12 countries, as well as the campaign for Slovenia prior to its joining the euro area in 2007. It included public opinion polls, advertising and direct marketing. Over 900,000 copies of different publications were distributed by the Central Bank of Cyprus - this is more than one copy per Cypriot! The aim was to enable everyone in Cyprus to check their new euro banknotes: every household received euro banknote ‘cards’, the same size as a credit card. They show the three main security features of the €50 and €20 banknotes and how to check them.As a result of these efforts, today we can celebrate a successful cash changeover. I am sure that the excellent relationship between the Central Bank of Cyprus and the ECB will grow even stronger, now that the central bank is a member of the Eurosystem. Indeed, intimate cooperation between the members of the team, the national central banks of the Eurosystem, and the ECB is the key for the success of the single monetary policy in the euro area.The entry of Cyprus into the euro area implies that the benefits of the Single Market will be further enhanced by the single currency. The euro offers a credible framework for price stability in an environment characterised by the absence of exchange rate uncertainty within the euro area. Cyprus will benefit from the stability-oriented policy of the ECB, which will help anchor inflation expectations. Furthermore, for a small open economy such as Cyprus, the euro adoption provides protection against international financial turmoil, which often has a disproportionate effect on smaller economies.Now, almost three weeks after the introduction of the new currency, I would like to stress that, in the short term, the conversion of prices into euros should not be taken as an opportunity to make unjustified price rises. This is especially important considering that food and energy prices are already exerting upward pressure on inflation in the euro area as a whole. Against this background, measures taken by the Cypriot government together with retailers, importers and manufacturers in order to avoid such adjustments are commendable.Looking further ahead, in order to fully reap the advantages of the euro and to ensure sustainable convergence, additional efforts with structural reform should be undertaken and appropriate policies implemented. The Cypriot economy needs to continue on a sustainable and credible path of fiscal consolidation based on structural measures, to improve its fiscal performance by reducing its debt ratios and to comply with the medium-term objective quantified in the convergence programme. In particular, public finances should have sufficient room for manoeuvre in order to better cope with the expected substantial increase in age-related public expenditures. Moreover, wage settlements need to remain moderate, taking into account labour productivity growth, labour market conditions and developments in competitor countries. For example, the indexation mechanism for wages and for some social benefits (cost-of-living allowances) should be reviewed in order to reduce risks associated with inflation inertia and losses in competitiveness. Such measures will not only make Cyprus’s economy more resilient to shocks but also create the best conditions for sustainable economic expansion, employment growth and price stability.Ladies and gentlemen, let me again congratulate you on your successful adoption of the euro and extend my very, very warm welcome to the new member of the Eurosystem family. Warmest welcome Cyprus! [1] I should like to thank Malin Andersson and Olivier Radelet for their input into this speech, Nick Vidalis and Hans-Joachim Klöckers for their helpful comments, as well as David Clarke for his additional contributions.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur attend confer celebr adopt euro let first congratul parti involv success cash changeov took place begin year go smooth none would possibl without excel perform cypriot economi converg process today euro celebr result success macroeconom polici cypriot author pursu recent year cyprus made signific progress nomin real converg owe success polici name wellmanag monetari exchang rate polici combin rang structur reform last decad hicp inflat cyprus contain averag except inflat rose main increas energi price well vat harmonis shortterm well longterm interest rate follow declin trend recent year level line euro area whole suggest market particip confid cyprus macroeconom fiscal develop well monetari exchang rate polici process nomin converg accompani robust econom growth real gdp growth cyprus well euro area recent year real output growth underpin domest demand particular strong privat consumpt import strong fix capit format cyprus gdp per capita ppp term progress around averag countri initi join euro area around signific improv may continu way spite remark progress toward nomin real converg cyprus experienc major imbal price cost competit develop favour sinc fiscal balanc deficittogdp ratio improv sinc stood gdp look financi side cyprus experienc substanti financi deepen reflect robust credit activ although process accompani support econom develop care monitor particular take place rapid pace membership exchang rate mechan ii erm ii anoth element cyprus success converg poundeuro exchang rate cyprus join erm ii may remain stabl throughout period erm ii particip eu council decid central pariti also becom final convers rate pound euro let also say ecb establish excel work relat central bank cyprus last coupl year governor central bank cyprus member general council ecb sinc may mid governor orphanid attend meet govern council observ januari becam offici member decisionmak bodi monetari polici euro area ecb central bank cyprus togeth nation changeov board european commiss nation intern author cooper close mani way prepar introduct euro euro inform campaign play vital role ecb togeth central bank cyprus made sure cypriot becam familiar euro banknot coin inform campaign consist optim communic mix drew experi communic campaign euro cash introduc countri well campaign slovenia prior join euro area includ public opinion poll advertis direct market copi differ public distribut central bank cyprus one copi per cypriot aim enabl everyon cyprus check new euro banknot everi household receiv euro banknot card size credit card show three main secur featur banknot check result effort today celebr success cash changeov sure excel relationship central bank cyprus ecb grow even stronger central bank member eurosystem inde intim cooper member team nation central bank eurosystem ecb key success singl monetari polici euro area entri cyprus euro area impli benefit singl market enhanc singl currenc euro offer credibl framework price stabil environ characteris absenc exchang rate uncertainti within euro area cyprus benefit stabilityori polici ecb help anchor inflat expect furthermor small open economi cyprus euro adopt provid protect intern financi turmoil often disproportion effect smaller economi almost three week introduct new currenc would like stress short term convers price euro taken opportun make unjustifi price rise especi import consid food energi price alreadi exert upward pressur inflat euro area whole background measur taken cypriot govern togeth retail import manufactur order avoid adjust commend look ahead order fulli reap advantag euro ensur sustain converg addit effort structur reform undertaken appropri polici implement cypriot economi need continu sustain credibl path fiscal consolid base structur measur improv fiscal perform reduc debt ratio compli mediumterm object quantifi converg programm particular public financ suffici room manoeuvr order better cope expect substanti increas agerel public expenditur moreov wage settlement need remain moder take account labour product growth labour market condit develop competitor countri exampl index mechan wage social benefit costofliv allow review order reduc risk associ inflat inertia loss competit measur make cyprus economi resili shock also creat best condit sustain econom expans employ growth price stabil ladi gentlemen let congratul success adopt euro extend warm welcom new member eurosystem famili warmest welcom cyprus like thank malin andersson olivi radelet input speech nick vidali hansjoachim klöcker help comment well clark addit contribut reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en