Benoît Cœuré: Monetary Policy Transmission and Bank Deleveraging,13-03-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,2741,"<p>* * *SummaryDeleveraging is not a process that policy-makers should seek to avoid; rather, it needs to take place and be properly managed, explains ECB Executive Board member Benoît Cœuré. Describing the good, the bad and the ugly deleveraging at the Future of Banking Summit organised by “The Economist” in Paris, he emphasises how the wrong type of deleveraging could impede recovery and make it more difficult for central banks to engineer an appropriate degree of monetary accommodation. To ensure the right type of deleveraging is achieved, Mr. Cœuré highlights, “both monetary policy and prudential supervision – notably the ECB’s ongoing comprehensive assessment – have a key role to play.” According to him, the comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance sheets and the steps taken towards the banking union are crucial to establish the conditions necessary for a transparent, competitive and stable banking sector. He adds, “and they will help monetary policy to regain traction across the euro area.”He concludes by explaining why it is important for the banking union to be complete, “Not moving promptly towards a single resolution mechanism (SRM) and a single resolution fund (SRF) would prolong financial fragmentation, leave the financial system exposed to systemic fragility, and, ultimately, be harmful for growth and jobs. This would in particular be the case if the SRF is only slowly mutualised, and if it cannot resort to a common European backstop from the outset.” * * *Ladies and Gentlemen [1],It is a great pleasure to speak to you at the Economist’s “Future of Banking” Summit.But before turning to the future of banking, let me briefly look back at its recent past. As you know well, the euro area banking sector is currently undergoing a secular deleveraging process. The need for deleveraging had its roots in a period of strong bank balance sheet expansion in the last few years. From the start of that expansion in 2005 to its peak in 2012, the total assets of monetary financial institutions rose by more than 60 percentage points of GDP to €33.7 trillion, i.e. 3.55 times euro area GDP. But as the crisis highlighted, this expansion was not necessarily backed by rising productive capacity in the euro area economy. Instead, it was, at least partly, channelled to low-productivity activity, as manifest for instance in the overinvestment in the construction sector in some Member States. The current adjustment reflects, therefore, the aftermath of a major financial crisis and the debt overhang that inevitably comes with it. It also reflects the end of the unsustainable business models and liability structures that many euro area banks had developed before the crisis. Hence, deleveraging is not a process that policy-makers should seek to avoid; rather, it needs to take place and be properly managed. The main point I want to make today is that how this process is managed has important implications for monetary policy. Deleveraging badly hinders the pass-through of our interest rates to borrowers. But by the same token, deleveraging well, to the extent that it restores the transmission of monetary policy, could potentially unleash a pent-up monetary easing. Achieving the right type of deleveraging depends crucially on the incentives embedded in the institutional framework in which banks operate. Both monetary policy and prudential supervision – notably the ECB’s ongoing comprehensive assessment – have a key role to play in this respect. Broadly speaking, there are three different types of bank deleveraging. These are the good, the bad and the ugly, as The Economist itself stated in a blog a couple of years ago. [2]“Good deleveraging” involves banks raising capital and getting rid of impaired assets in a targeted and rapid manner. This approach recognises and corrects the flaws in legacy business models and allows for a relatively swift reallocation of credit to more competitive sectors. This eventually translates into a more dynamic recovery. “Bad deleveraging” entails an indiscriminate reduction in balance sheet size, regardless of the quality of assets. The main motivation for such adjustments is to reduce indebtedness. And in order to “balance the books”, this process is accompanied by asset shedding. The upshot is a potentially prolonged, across-the-board reduction of credit to the real economy.Finally, “ugly deleveraging” comprises banks specifically discarding good assets while keeping distressed assets in the banking book and recording them at close to nominal values. This method can rapidly turn a bank into a “bad bank” that does little to support credit creation. These last two types of deleveraging can have significant real economy effects. Financially weak banks tend to roll over unprofitable loans that do not support growth – which is why they have sometimes been dubbed “zombie banks”. [3] There is in fact some evidence that such evergreening practices have appeared in the euro area as well in the last few years. [4] The wrong type of deleveraging also has a further effect, which I want to concentrate on today: it harms the transmission of monetary policy. Given the bank-based nature of our financial system, the main channel through which the ECB’s monetary policy impulse reaches the real economy is through bank lending rates. And this is particularly important for smaller borrowers, as they cannot easily substitute bank financing for capital market financing such as corporate bond issuance, as larger borrowers have been able to.But banks that are deleveraging through a prolonged process of retaining earnings and rolling-over bad loans tend to block this channel. Regardless of the level of nominal interest rates, they are likely to demand higher compensation for new exposures that increase risk-weighted assets, including notably loans to non-financial firms. And if they are competing for new deposits to improve their loan-to-deposit ratios, they will face higher funding costs, which then have to be incorporated into the interest rate spread for new loans. All this means that monetary policy starts to lose traction. Indeed, different deleveraging needs are one explanation for the fragmentation in the pass-through of interest rates in euro area countries. Those countries that saw the highest pre-crisis increases in private debt – principally Ireland, Cyprus, Portugal and Spain – and that therefore have the greatest bank deleveraging needs, are by and large the same countries where monetary policy transmission has been most impaired. Of course, other factors such as sovereign risk have also played a role.Significant progress has already been made with bank deleveraging. Banks have engaged in a sweeping shrinkage of balance sheets – declining by around 20 percentage points of GDP in 2013. Loan-to-deposit ratios have also come down, from more than 140% in 2008 to less than 120% at the end of last year, mainly through higher deposits. And we have observed a marked increase in banks’ risk-weighted capital ratios since the beginning of 2009. Since the onset of the global financial crisis, euro area banks have issued around €235 billion of equity, in addition to other forms of capital (e.g. retained earnings, CoCos, etc.). As a result, large parts of the sector now comply with the minimum capital requirements under Basel III – well before it becomes binding.There are already signs, such as the stabilisation of credit conditions [5], that these efforts are improving the transmission of our easy monetary policy stance. The challenge for policy-makers now is to finish the job: to ensure that deleveraging takes place fast, that it takes place well, and that it happens everywhere where it is needed.Monetary policy itself has a role to play in this process. Our measures have helped ease pressures on the liability side of bank balance sheets that might have led to “bad” or “ugly” deleveraging. For example, in the first phase of the crisis after the Lehman Brothers failure, banks faced a funding crunch which could have led them to fire sales of assets. We helped avert this by effectively standing in for the interbank market. Our two very long term refinancing operations (VLTROs) in 2011 and 2012 had an analogous effect in the term funding market.It is important to stress, however, that we aimed to prevent a disorderly deleveraging, not the deleveraging process itself. Bank deleveraging leads to a reduction in inside money, that is money created by banks, and with fragmented financial markets, liquidity flows within the euro area were disrupted. By providing an elastic supply of central bank money, we substituted inside for outside money to support the stabilisation of the banking system. Indeed, base money – i.e. the total amount of currency in circulation and banks’ holdings of liquid deposits with the Eurosystem – increased by almost 30% following the two VLTROs. The ECB’s forward guidance should also be supportive: the Governing Council of the ECB expects interest rates to stay at present or lower levels for an extended period of time, while inflation should rise towards 2% over our projection horizon. This implies that real interest rates for borrowers will progressively fall as inflation rises. And we stand ready to act if this scenario does not materialise.But, nonetheless, broad money and credit expansion by the euro area banking system has remained anaemic. The annual growth rate of M3 slowed steadily in the aftermath of the VLTROs and stood at a very low level of 1.2% in January 2014. The monetary policy impulse, as reflected by the increase of base money, has hardly been transmitted to the real economy.Additionally, it is clear that the ingredients of “good deleveraging” cannot be provided by monetary policy alone. Good deleveraging involves, on the liability side, equity being built up through outright issuance or as last resort through public interventions. And on the asset side, it involves writing down and carving out non-performing assets. Indeed, without such measures there is a risk that low interest rates and ample liquidity provided by the ECB might delay the restructuring and reallocation that are necessary to escape a debt overhang. For this reason, prudential measures must also play a key part in the deleveraging process.For the euro area, the principal tool to steer deleveraging towards its good form is the ongoing comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance sheets. The ECB has recently released more technical details about an important component of this exercise, the asset quality review, so I will not repeat its features today. The assessment will shed light on bank assets and ensure that non-performing exposures are fully recognised, and prompt timely corrective action in the form of bank restructuring and capital replenishment. In turn, I expect this to help monetary policy regain traction across the euro area. Actually, this for me will be a measure of the success of the exercise.Why do I expect this?For banks that are found to be healthy by the assessment, the price mechanism will no longer be obscured by uncertainty about asset valuation and bank funding models. This should be reflected in higher share prices and cheaper funding costs, supporting the pass-through of our interest rates.For banks that are restructured and recapitalised, lending rates should also become more responsive to our monetary policy impulses. There will no longer be a need for such banks to rebuild capital, and hence their incentive to reduce loans that carry higher risk weights, like those to non-financial corporations, will disappear. When loans are repaid, banks can opt to lend again rather than to shrink their balance sheets. At the same time, spreads on loans should come down. Funding pressures are likely to attenuate as banks reach their target loan-to-deposit ratios and as interest rates on deposits converge. And as more banks free up balance sheet space for new lending, competition among banks for borrowers should start to increase, putting further downward pressure on new lending rates. We have already seen some of these dynamics playing out in Spain since mid-2012.By identifying weaker and stronger banks, and putting a price on bank assets, the comprehensive assessment may also have a further effect: the results could present an opportunity for a revival of M&A activity, which has been very weak since the crisis, with the overall value of deals decreasing fourfold from 2008 to 2012. A rationalisation of the euro area banking sector will increase efficiency, and hence be conducive to a smoother transmission of monetary policy.In short, a strict and credible comprehensive assessment will significantly support monetary policy. Insofar as it leads to bank lending rates converging between the core and the periphery, it will allow a significant additional easing of monetary policy in some jurisdictions. And insofar as it leads to better access to finance, higher growth and rising inflation, it will support our expectation that real interest rates will gradually ease over the projection horizon.One final point: looking further ahead, I expect the downsizing of the banking sector to accelerate the development of alternative, capital market-based sources of finance, especially for smaller firms. We are already seeing this playing out in some jurisdictions – for example, the “mini bonds” scheme in Italy – and through initiatives, which the ECB supports, to revive European ABS markets.This matters for monetary policy for two reasons. First, it provides a spare tyre, i.e. an additional channel through which monetary policy can be transmitted if the bank lending channel becomes impaired again in the future. Second, it reduces banks’ market power, which may tend to make bank lending rates more responsive to monetary policy. Indeed, recent research has shown that where banks in Europe face limited competition, and firms depend on them, financing constraints for SMEs have been found to be higher. [6] Such a rebalancing of the financing mix of the euro area economy probably requires further regulatory action to acknowledge the emergence of new, high-quality capital market instruments, such as simpler and more transparent ABSs. Let me conclude.Depending on how it materialises, bank deleveraging has a potential to impede the recovery and make it more difficult for central banks to engineer an appropriate degree of monetary accommodation or, to the contrary, to support the transmission of monetary policy. Therefore, policy-makers need to set proper incentives to promote “good” deleveraging and to steer clear of “bad” or “ugly” deleveraging. Monetary policy has a vital role to play here, notably by providing the necessary liquidity support. But ultimately, it is up to policy-makers in other domains to ensure that the banking system is restored to health, and becomes fit for supporting the recovery and the reallocation of production factors in the euro area. Here, the steps being taken towards a banking union and the comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance sheets are crucial. They will establish the conditions necessary for a transparent, competitive and stable banking sector. And they will help monetary policy to regain traction across the euro area.One final remark: for all this to work, the banking union needs to be complete.  We need not only a single supervisory mechanism, but also a single resolution mechanism (SRM) and single resolution fund (SRF) and, at a later stage, a single deposit insurance scheme. If we fail to establish the SRM and SRF, bank resolution will remain a national task, resulting in a misalignment of responsibilities, and entrenching the link between banks and sovereigns. Not moving promptly towards the SRM and SRF would prolong uselessly financial fragmentation, leave the euro area financial system exposed to systemic fragility, and, ultimately, be harmful for growth and jobs. This would in particular be the case if the SRF is only slowly mutualised, and if it cannot resort to a common European backstop from the outset.I thank you for your attention.[1]I would like to thank Federic Holm-Hadulla for his contributions. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.[2]http://www.economist.com/blogs/freeexchange/2012/05/deleveraging[3]See, for example, Albertazzi, U. and M. Bottero (2014), “The Procyclicality of Foreign Bank Lending: Evidence from the Global Financial Crisis.” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.[4]Although the identification of “evergreening” practices is challenging, a large number of analyses have been conducted on this issue looking at Japan’s “lost decade”. See, among others, Caballero, R., T. Hoshi and A. K. Kashyap (2008), “Zombie Lending and Depressed Restructuring in Japan.” American Economic Review, Vol. 98, No. 5. One more recent study looks at the global financial crisis and identifies lending patterns consistent with evergreening practices, although limited to smaller banks; see Albertazzi, U. and D. Marchetti (2010) Credit supply, flight to quality and evergreening: an analysis of bank-firm relationships after Lehman, Bank of Italy Working Paper No. 756. [5]Euro area bank lending survey, ECB January, 2014.[6]Ryan, R., M. O’Toole and F. McCann (2014), “Does bank market power affect SME financing constraints?,” Journal of Banking & Finance. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",summarydeleverag process policymak seek avoid rather need take place proper manag explain ecb execut board member benoît cœuré describ good bad ugli deleverag futur bank summit organis economist pari emphasis wrong type deleverag could imped recoveri make difficult central bank engin appropri degre monetari accommod ensur right type deleverag achiev mr cœuré highlight monetari polici prudenti supervis notabl ecb ongo comprehens assess key role play accord comprehens assess bank balanc sheet step taken toward bank union crucial establish condit necessari transpar competit stabl bank sector add help monetari polici regain traction across euro area conclud explain import bank union complet move prompt toward singl resolut mechan srm singl resolut fund srf would prolong financi fragment leav financi system expos system fragil ultim harm growth job would particular case srf slowli mutualis cannot resort common european backstop outset ladi gentlemen great pleasur speak economist futur bank summit turn futur bank let briefli look back recent past know well euro area bank sector current undergo secular deleverag process need deleverag root period strong bank balanc sheet expans last year start expans peak total asset monetari financi institut rose percentag point gdp trillion e time euro area gdp crisi highlight expans necessarili back rise product capac euro area economi instead least part channel lowproduct activ manifest instanc overinvest construct sector member state current adjust reflect therefor aftermath major financi crisi debt overhang inevit come also reflect end unsustain busi model liabil structur mani euro area bank develop crisi henc deleverag process policymak seek avoid rather need take place proper manag main point want make today process manag import implic monetari polici deleverag bad hinder passthrough interest rate borrow token deleverag well extent restor transmiss monetari polici could potenti unleash pentup monetari eas achiev right type deleverag depend crucial incent embed institut framework bank oper monetari polici prudenti supervis notabl ecb ongo comprehens assess key role play respect broad speak three differ type bank deleverag good bad ugli economist state blog coupl year ago good deleverag involv bank rais capit get rid impair asset target rapid manner approach recognis correct flaw legaci busi model allow relat swift realloc credit competit sector eventu translat dynam recoveri bad deleverag entail indiscrimin reduct balanc sheet size regardless qualiti asset main motiv adjust reduc indebted order balanc book process accompani asset shed upshot potenti prolong acrosstheboard reduct credit real economi final ugli deleverag compris bank specif discard good asset keep distress asset bank book record close nomin valu method rapid turn bank bad bank littl support credit creation last two type deleverag signific real economi effect financi weak bank tend roll unprofit loan support growth sometim dub zombi bank fact evid evergreen practic appear euro area well last year wrong type deleverag also effect want concentr today transmiss monetari polici given bankbas natur financi system main channel ecb monetari polici impuls reach real economi bank lend rate particular import smaller borrow cannot easili substitut bank financ capit market financ corpor bond issuanc larger borrow abl bank deleverag prolong process retain earn rollingov bad loan tend block channel regardless level nomin interest rate like demand higher compens new exposur increas riskweight asset includ notabl loan nonfinanci firm compet new deposit improv loantodeposit ratio face higher fund cost incorpor interest rate spread new loan mean monetari polici start lose traction inde differ deleverag need one explan fragment passthrough interest rate euro area countri countri saw highest precrisi increas privat debt princip ireland cyprus portug spain therefor greatest bank deleverag need larg countri monetari polici transmiss impair cours factor sovereign risk also play role signific progress alreadi made bank deleverag bank engag sweep shrinkag balanc sheet declin around percentag point gdp loantodeposit ratio also come less end last year main higher deposit observ mark increas bank riskweight capit ratio sinc begin sinc onset global financi crisi euro area bank issu around billion equiti addit form capit e g retain earn coco etc result larg part sector compli minimum capit requir basel iii well becom bind alreadi sign stabilis credit condit effort improv transmiss easi monetari polici stanc challeng policymak finish job ensur deleverag take place fast take place well happen everywher need monetari polici role play process measur help eas pressur liabil side bank balanc sheet might led bad ugli deleverag exampl first phase crisi lehman brother failur bank face fund crunch could led fire sale asset help avert effect stand interbank market two long term refinanc oper vltros analog effect term fund market import stress howev aim prevent disord deleverag deleverag process bank deleverag lead reduct insid money money creat bank fragment financi market liquid flow within euro area disrupt provid elast suppli central bank money substitut insid outsid money support stabilis bank system inde base money e total amount currenc circul bank hold liquid deposit eurosystem increas almost follow two vltros ecb forward guidanc also support govern council ecb expect interest rate stay present lower level extend period time inflat rise toward project horizon impli real interest rate borrow progress fall inflat rise stand readi act scenario materialis nonetheless broad money credit expans euro area bank system remain anaem annual growth rate m slow steadili aftermath vltros stood low level januari monetari polici impuls reflect increas base money hard transmit real economi addit clear ingredi good deleverag cannot provid monetari polici alon good deleverag involv liabil side equiti built outright issuanc last resort public intervent asset side involv write carv nonperform asset inde without measur risk low interest rate ampl liquid provid ecb might delay restructur realloc necessari escap debt overhang reason prudenti measur must also play key part deleverag process euro area princip tool steer deleverag toward good form ongo comprehens assess bank balanc sheet ecb recent releas technic detail import compon exercis asset qualiti review repeat featur today assess shed light bank asset ensur nonperform exposur fulli recognis prompt time correct action form bank restructur capit replenish turn expect help monetari polici regain traction across euro area actual measur success exercis expect bank found healthi assess price mechan longer obscur uncertainti asset valuat bank fund model reflect higher share price cheaper fund cost support passthrough interest rate bank restructur recapitalis lend rate also becom respons monetari polici impuls longer need bank rebuild capit henc incent reduc loan carri higher risk weight like nonfinanci corpor disappear loan repaid bank opt lend rather shrink balanc sheet time spread loan come fund pressur like attenu bank reach target loantodeposit ratio interest rate deposit converg bank free balanc sheet space new lend competit among bank borrow start increas put downward pressur new lend rate alreadi seen dynam play spain sinc mid identifi weaker stronger bank put price bank asset comprehens assess may also effect result could present opportun reviv m activ weak sinc crisi overal valu deal decreas fourfold rationalis euro area bank sector increas effici henc conduc smoother transmiss monetari polici short strict credibl comprehens assess signific support monetari polici insofar lead bank lend rate converg core peripheri allow signific addit eas monetari polici jurisdict insofar lead better access financ higher growth rise inflat support expect real interest rate gradual eas project horizon one final point look ahead expect downsiz bank sector acceler develop altern capit marketbas sourc financ especi smaller firm alreadi see play jurisdict exampl mini bond scheme itali initi ecb support reviv european ab market matter monetari polici two reason first provid spare tyre e addit channel monetari polici transmit bank lend channel becom impair futur second reduc bank market power may tend make bank lend rate respons monetari polici inde recent research shown bank europ face limit competit firm depend financ constraint smes found higher rebalanc financ mix euro area economi probabl requir regulatori action acknowledg emerg new highqual capit market instrument simpler transpar abss let conclud depend materialis bank deleverag potenti imped recoveri make difficult central bank engin appropri degre monetari accommod contrari support transmiss monetari polici therefor policymak need set proper incent promot good deleverag steer clear bad ugli deleverag monetari polici vital role play notabl provid necessari liquid support ultim policymak domain ensur bank system restor health becom fit support recoveri realloc product factor euro area step taken toward bank union comprehens assess bank balanc sheet crucial establish condit necessari transpar competit stabl bank sector help monetari polici regain traction across euro area one final remark work bank union need complet need singl supervisori mechan also singl resolut mechan srm singl resolut fund srf later stage singl deposit insur scheme fail establish srm srf bank resolut remain nation task result misalign respons entrench link bank sovereign move prompt toward srm srf would prolong useless financi fragment leav euro area financi system expos system fragil ultim harm growth job would particular case srf slowli mutualis cannot resort common european backstop outset thank attent would like thank feder holmhadulla contribut remain sole respons opinion contain herein http www economist comblogsfreeexchang deleverag see exampl albertazzi u m bottero procycl foreign bank lend evid global financi crisi journal intern econom forthcom although identif evergreen practic challeng larg number analys conduct issu look japan lost decad see among other caballero r hoshi k kashyap zombi lend depress restructur japan american econom review vol one recent studi look global financi crisi identifi lend pattern consist evergreen practic although limit smaller bank see albertazzi u d marchetti credit suppli flight qualiti evergreen analysi bankfirm relationship lehman bank itali work paper euro area bank lend survey ecb januari ryan r m o tool f mccann bank market power affect sme financ constraint journal bank financ reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en