Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Lessons for monetary policy from the recent crisis,19-01-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,4776,"<p>The financial crisis has been a very challenging period for policy-makers worldwide, not least for monetary authorities. Central banks have lowered interest rates to levels close to zero and implemented a broad range of unprecedented non-standard policy measures. The recent experience offers, I think, five lessons from which monetary policy-makers can learn. Let me list them upfront, before turning to each of them – in that order – in my remarks today. Central bank independence remains critical to delivering price stability, particularly during crises. A clearly defined objective of price stability is essential to firmly anchor inflation expectations, which can act as an automatic stabiliser during a crisis.Monetary policy should be oriented to the medium term. Trying to fine-tune monetary policy on the basis of indicators, such as output gaps and measures of core inflation, which are either subject to ex post revisions or are misleading, may – and often does – induce an excess short-termism and entail serious risks.Monetary and financial variables should be a key input in the assessment of medium to long-run risks to price stability, particularly during financial crises.Finally, price stability and financial stability are complementary. The new macro-prudential function and monetary policy reinforce each other.The value of central bank independence is the first, lasting lesson. Of course, central bank independence is a sine qua non of effective monetary policy, at all times and under all possible circumstances. If a central bank is not independent, policy-makers from other quarters have strong incentives to pass on to the bank problems and responsibilities for which they, in fact, are to be held accountable. This – always – leads to a blurring of responsibilities and potentially to a loss of trust, which ultimately undermines the effectiveness of monetary policy. [1]But in times of crisis the value of independence rises even further. In perturbed market conditions central banks may have to implement extraordinary measures, both in terms of reducing policy rates to unprecedented levels, and in terms of unconventional liquidity measures. If these measures – untested as they are – are to be expected to exert any impact on economic decisions, they have to be seen by market participants as the result of an autonomous decision by the central bank. They ought to be seen as being consistent with its overall policy framework, rather than the result of pressures from the fiscal authorities. The reason is simple. If a central bank comes under pressure in times of crisis, and succumbs to that pressure, it is unlikely to behave differently in good times. Therefore, if the central bank is externally constrained to take exceptional measures during a crisis, it will not be able to resist the same pressures when the crisis ends. This may disanchor inflation expectations and thus undermine the effectiveness of the measures implemented during the crisis. The ECB has made no exception. The financial crisis that has shaken the global economy for two full years has meant that we had to explore new avenues of monetary policy intervention. We all had to experiment with new tools, as conventional instruments had been blunted and damaged to some extent by the financial collapse. True, the activation of new tools sometimes has brought us closer to the lines that separate the different spheres of policy-making responsibilities from each other – lines we previously considered as remote. However, the fact that during a crisis the central bank broadens its range of tools does not imply that it is compromising its objective and its independence in pursuit of its mandate. In the case of the ECB, the institutional framework for the single monetary policy establishes the ECB’s independence in choosing the instruments necessary to achieve its mandate of price stability. We cannot modify our mandate. But we can choose the instruments which, from time to time, we consider most efficient in attaining our objective. This is the essence of “instrument independence”, a fundamental cornerstone of the contemporary theory and practice of central banking, and a critical precondition for central banks’ success in taming inflation and keeping it low and stable over the last 30 years. Because of the crucial role of banks in the real economy of the euro area, in the autumn of 2008 we started to provide liquidity in unlimited volumes and with longer maturities to banks. In June 2009 we launched a programme to purchase euro-denominated covered bonds issued by euro area resident banks. The aim was to jump-start this market, which represents the bright side of securitisation, and yet had suffered considerably in the crisis. By May 2010 persistent and excessive government borrowing and accounting frauds had unleashed a debt run on Greece. Market uncertainties had spread to other issuers and a localised loss of confidence had soon developed into a generalised market paralysis: a virtual seizing-up of the market for government paper, for any signature except the most credible. In these conditions, the ECB decided to intervene again, through a new Securities Markets Programme. The purpose of these interventions was – and still is – genuinely a monetary policy one. The market for government paper plays a central role in the financial system of any developed economy, and constitutes a crucial link in the upstream portion of the transmission mechanism that channels monetary policy impulses to the real economy. This is due to the power of collateral in the contemporary financial world. The presence or absence of collateral in money market transactions, and the quality of the collateral used to secure money market transactions determine whether the transmission mechanism starts to function or is blocked, whether it is foreseeable and dependable, or uncertain and unreliable. The perceived quality of collateral influences the scale of market spreads over and above the overnight rate at which the central bank lends to banks. And money market spreads are the first asset prices whose orderly adjustment is so important in ensuring that the monetary policy intentions of a central bank are conveyed to the broad economy. In addition, one should not neglect the fact that government securities provide the basis on which all private debt instruments are priced. I would take the argument one step further. I suggest that the central bank should use its independence to remind the other main policy actors at all times, even during crises, of their responsibilities. It should not act in a way which may create disincentives for the other authorities. The fiscal and supervisory authorities are key players. When implementing an accommodative policy in response to a potential seizing-up of financial markets, the central bank should not shy away from calling on the fiscal authority to implement a credible medium-term budgetary adjustment. I would even consider this to be a pre-condition for the central bank to enact such a policy. Otherwise the uncertainties surrounding the fiscal framework may contaminate monetary policy. On a more general note, an accommodative liquidity policy entailing atypically low interest rates needs reinforcing safeguards. On the one hand, it needs to be accompanied by a healthy fiscal framework: such a framework removes one prime source of instability and – where instability persists nonetheless – it broadens the scope of action open to central banks. This has been a key point for the ECB especially over the last 12 months and will continue to be in 2011. We have emphasised several times that it is the task of the political authorities to ensure a credible fiscal framework, composed of appropriate national budgetary programmes, a rigorous surveillance framework at the euro area level and a stable safety net underpinning the stability of the euro area economy. The ECB has also repeatedly called on the governments of the Member States to make a leap forward in improving the institutional framework underlying the euro area. We have made concrete proposals over the last few months on ways to improve the fiscal and macroeconomic surveillance underlying the Stability and Growth Pact and to address crises, if they occur. A lot has been done but there is a need to complete this work, as we have stated recently, to protect the system against market instability. We have also repeatedly called for a timely consolidation of public finances, in contrast to some commentators and academics. Had this consolidation started earlier, rather than under the pressure of the markets, it would have been less painful. The same pressure needs to be exerted on the supervisory and fiscal authorities in charge of ensuring the solvency of financial institutions. An unconditional supply of liquidity by the central bank to address systemic problems may create disincentives to recapitalise and restructure the fragile parts of the system, and thus delay the recovery. The provision of liquidity should thus be conducted in a way that maintains the incentives for financial institutions and supervisors to take all the necessary measures to restore normality as quickly as possible. This is why extraordinary measures have to be implemented within a framework which foresees a timely exit when conditions allow.The second lesson taught by the crisis is that a clearly defined objective of price stability can act as an automatic stabiliser when uncertainty becomes destabilising. This is always true, in both good times and bad. In fact, well-anchored expectations in the euro area were instrumental in avoiding large interest rate hikes before the crisis, when commodity prices rose sharply. At the height of the crisis, however, they became a policy instrument in their own right. Thanks to well-anchored inflation expectations we were able to avoid deflationary spirals and reduce real interest rates in tandem with nominal rates. Note that if inflation expectations are well anchored, and impervious to transient shocks to actual inflation, there is no need to manipulate key parameters of the monetary policy frameworks, i.e. no need to increase the inflation target or to move to price level targeting in order to resist deflationary risks in times of macroeconomic distress. [2] Opportunistic manipulations of the monetary policy framework of course damage the foundations on which that framework rests. So, being able to rely on the rebalancing effect of inflation expectations is a superior option. But firmly anchored inflation expectations also make policy commitments unnecessary. These commitments concerning the future course of the policy rate are viewed as providing one effective instrument for introducing a stimulus when the room for reducing the nominal interest rate is exhausted. But they come at a price. Policy commitments cannot be effective unless they materially constrain future options. Again, being able to rely on firm inflation expectations offers a way to reduce real rates and provide a stimulus without incurring the limitations of policy commitments. [3] The third lesson concerns the risks associated with a monetary policy aimed at fine-tuning short-term objectives. Experience, especially prior to the crisis, has revealed the risks of designing policy on indicators and variables which are not sufficiently robust. Let me give a couple of examples, starting with the output gap. As the literature has clearly shown, the empirical proxies used to capture the output gap are subject to constant revisions. [4] There is evidence that for the period 2002-2004 the output gap estimates in the United States were ex post significantly smaller than the real-time estimates. [5] Policy-makers who base their decisions mainly on such assessments of the cyclical position can be seriously led astray. The Great Inflation of the 1970s was, for instance, to a large extent due to measurement errors in the real-time estimates of the output gap combined with an overreaction to output gap measures when assessing the state of the economy. [6] The same applies to the low interest rates implemented for a prolonged period in the middle of the last decade. [7]Core inflation measures are another example. These can give misleading signals in the event of persistent changes to relative prices. This is not so much a lesson that we can learn from the crisis, but a phenomenon that the crisis has exposed as one of the main factors of the pre-crisis Great Moderation. Examples abound. For example, technological innovations concentrated in the production of the goods included in the core inflation basket can persistently push down selected prices. There is also evidence that globalisation has been depressing prices for core CPI products due to increased global competition in the tradable goods sector [8], while at the same time prices for energy and food products have been pushed up by the demand of those emerging economies that were opening up to the global economy. [9] In these conditions, too much emphasis on core inflation can distort policy inference. Core inflation can provide policy-makers with a downwardly biased assessment of overall price pressures and – mistakenly – suggest a pro-cyclical policy course. In a globalised world, the destabilising mechanisms that such distortions of perspective can activate are manifold. Today increased trade and capital flows make monetary policy decisions in systemically important countries tightly interact. In fact, monetary policy decisions in industrialised countries find in the exchange rate arrangements of important emerging market economies a potentially potent multiplier. For example, the currently accommodative monetary policy of industrialised countries generates more liquidity at the global level than if emerging market economies’ currencies were free to float. Limits to the sterilisation of international capital inflows under currency pegs lead to generalised liquidity spillovers on a global scale. At the same time the accumulation of foreign reserves by emerging market economies leads to downward pressure on long-term interest rates in global economies. This, in turn, intensifies the trends in asset and commodity prices, thus potentially leading to further imbalances and global inflation. When setting their policies, monetary policy-makers in industrialised countries should take this dimension into account. Monetary policies aimed at fine-tuning short-term objectives also run a serious risk that they will induce too much policy forbearance for too long. Exiting an extraordinarily accommodative mode too late can sow the seeds of future imbalances. As the economy recovers from an exceptionally deep recession, real-time output gap estimates and estimates of structural unemployment or the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU) are particularly uncertain. Structural unemployment is likely to have significantly risen because of the mismatch between the skills of workers that lose their jobs in sectors that are downsizing, and the skills of workers required in the expanding sectors of the economy. While emphasis on output gap measures can instil the conviction that unemployment could be reduced by monetary means, it becomes an illusion if the problem is due to a structural mismatch of skills or labour market imperfections. Structural policies are the only policy instrument that can address structural unemployment. The fourth lesson that I draw from these difficult times is that this crisis has certainly proved that the conventional wisdom of the last decade – that money does not matter, even for monetary policy – is wrong. I guess I do not need to emphasise this to alumni from the University of Chicago!Money and credit aggregates do contain important information that allows policy-makers to overcome the pitfalls related to some economic indicators. When inflation is rendered dormant by a sequence of favourable supply side shocks, this creates an environment in which central banks might find it extremely difficult to raise interest rates, even if such a response were justified by bullish financial markets and by signs of economic overheating. In these conditions, incorporating monetary and financial imbalances in the policy process – whether in the form of a monetary pillar or in the form of a leaning-against-the-wind attitude – can help support a pre-emptive policy even in the face of subdued or falling inflation. The reason is simple. Monetary and credit imbalances which form alongside and – I would say – in symbiosis with an asset price trend indicate that price stability might be endangered over the medium term. Reacting to the monetary side of this symbiosis may prevent larger problems from occurring subsequently. [10] In addition, monitoring credit growth can also be useful to identify other sources of unsustainable credit developments, even if some of them cannot necessarily be eliminated by monetary policy tools, and would instead require action of a macro-prudential nature. After years of forgetfulness, macroeconomic theory seems to have caught up with reality and shifted attention to credit and leverage as critical parameters that a central bank should consult regularly to measure the pulse of the economy. [11] The ECB consistently used these parameters even when they were derided as relics of a defunct monetary doctrine. They proved useful. They gave information about financing conditions and the financial structure, as well as about the condition and behaviour of banks, when these sources of information were critical to the assessment of the health of the transmission mechanism and, more broadly, the state of the business cycle. And this dimension of monetary analysis has proved particularly valuable in shaping the ECB’s response to the financial crisis. There is indeed evidence for the euro area that without duly taking the monetary analysis into account, inflation in the euro area would have been distinctly higher at times of financial exuberance and would have fallen deep into negative territory in the wake of the financial market collapse, starting in the autumn of 2008. The economy as a whole would have been more volatile. [12]On a more general note, by including monetary analysis in their monetary strategy, central banks can ensure that important information stemming from money and credit, typically neglected in conventional cyclical forecasting models of the economy, is considered in the formulation of monetary policy decisions. There is compelling empirical evidence showing that at low frequencies, that is over medium to longer-term horizons, inflation shows a robust positive association with monetary growth. [13]The fifth lesson from the financial crisis is that ensuring price stability is not sufficient for financial stability. To be sure, the conventional wisdom prevailing before the crisis was twofold. First, stabilising inflation would do the job. As inflation is – according to the pre-crisis consensus – a summary statistic for the state of the economy, for demand pressures, then any exuberance in financial markets would not be policy-relevant unless it exerts upward pressures on inflation. Second, and partly as a consequence, central banks should only pick up the pieces after the bubble has burst, and the costs of doing this relative to a policy of resisting the bubble while it is forming would not be large. Both these prescriptions have turned out to be major mistakes. For one thing, inflation and financial exuberance are often negatively – not positively – correlated, so that concentrating a central bank on inflation only means biasing the assessment of the risks to the macro-economy from a longer-term perspective. And, cleaning up the economy in the wake of a financial collapse can be exceedingly costly. This raises the question of whether central banks should be given the task of ensuring both price stability and financial stability, and possibly given additional tools to do so. The interlinkages between financial stability and price stability and between monetary policy and prudential supervision have become more evident as a result of the crisis. Monetary policy can affect systemic risk via a number of channels. First, being mandated to a price stability objective, a central bank sets in place the necessary conditions for financial stability. Economic history tells us that without price stability financial stability is certainly absent. Either inflation hedging might take the most improvised and destabilising forms, or the central bank itself – going through cycles of go-stop policies – might become an independent source of macroeconomic instability and thus financial volatility. We all remember that a long span of time of unanchored inflation expectations and poor inflation records encouraged all sorts of self-made strategies of inflation hedging in the 1970s in many industrialised countries. Italy’s housing market, for example, received a formidable boost from Italians’ attempt to insure against sustained losses in purchasing power. But as soon as monetary policy in the 1980s changed paths and embarked on decisive stabilisation, and inflation risks subsided, house prices started to plummet, making the disinflationary recession more painful. So, lack of price stability generates financial volatility and financial volatility aggravates macroeconomic uncertainty.A second channel through which monetary policy can contribute to financial stability is through its lender-of-last-resort function. When financial markets become dysfunctional and the monetary transmission channels are no longer working properly, monetary policy has a role to play in supporting the liquidity conditions of solvent and illiquid banks. I mentioned this before – when I described the ECB’s reaction to the crisis. Third, more recent analysis has drawn attention to a channel through which monetary policy might also – unintentionally – influence the perception of risk by financial markets and thus, ultimately, the assumption of risk by financial agents: the so-called risk-taking channel. [14] Financial institutions apparently increase their leverage during booms and reduce it during recessions. Thus, contrary to common assumptions, financial institutions’ leverage is pro-cyclical; the expansion and contraction of balance sheets amplifies, rather than counteracts, the credit cycle. Protracted loose monetary conditions can foster excessive risk-taking and, consequentially, produce a build-up of financial imbalances. If not accurately controlled, this channel can add to the pro-cyclicality of financial markets.Now, you have two ways to counter financial pro-cyclicality. The first is through a monetary policy regime that is not centred exclusively on inflation, but leans against the wind of financial imbalances. What does this mean? It means, for example, implementing a tighter policy in the face of financial exuberance than would be justified by the same inflation outlook in more tranquil market conditions. It means tolerating a downdrift in inflation in exchange for some more insurance against greater and more disruptive risks to price and financial stability in the longer run. The second way to counter financial pro-cyclicality is through macro-prudential supervision, a new perspective of macroeconomic control. Macro-prudential supervision aims to support the stability of the financial system as such and seeks to dampen its pro-cyclicality by eliciting regulatory and supervisory instruments. From the central bank’s perspective, this implies that macro-prudential supervision is relevant to the extent that it has an impact on the functioning of the transmission mechanism through which a central bank seeks to influence the outlook for price stability. It is clear that the two policies are complementary. But, does one of them make the other redundant? I don’t think so. Let me advance my own view about the correct way to organise the interaction between the two. A leaning-against-the-wind approach in monetary policy prevents a risk-less interest rate – the floor to all borrowing costs in the economy – from becoming pro-cyclical. Macro-prudential policies make sure that the leverage that the economy creates at that floor interest rate and the spreads that are paid by risky borrowers over and above the floor interest rate set by the central bank do not become an additional pro-cyclical source of volatility for the financial system and the economy as a whole. How about the other dimension of supervision: micro-prudential policies? Note, first, the difference between macro and micro. Macro-prudential supervision aims at limiting the likelihood of failure of significant portions of the financial system, or systemic risk. It follows that the macro-prudential supervision stresses the possibility that actions that may seem desirable or reasonable from the perspective of individual institutions may result in unwelcome system outcomes. Micro-prudential supervision, instead, aims at limiting the likelihood of failure of individual institutions. While the two policies have clearly a different scope, ultimately the micro-prudential sphere provides the instruments that can be activated in response to macro-prudential risks. An issue which has attracted attention in the past is whether central banks should be entrusted with supervisory powers – the instruments – or whether those powers should remain within a separate body. My take on this dispute is the following. The experience of the crisis tends to suggest that having the micro and macro-prudential instruments well integrated among other functions within the central bank might be desirable. Why? Because it always makes good sense to coordinate objectives with instruments. And it looks to me natural that such coordination might best be performed by the central bank. Independent bodies are better able to deal with the necessary exchange of information between the monetary and supervisory functions, and can build any Chinese wall between the two that may be needed to avoid conflicts of interest. Progress has been made since the eruption of the crisis in several countries, with the supervisory powers being transferred from a separate institution, which in many cases was insufficiently independent from the political authorities, to the central bank.But organising the coordinating role in the euro area context remains a complex undertaking. This is due not only to the fact that, national supervisory authorities are sometimes part of the national central banks, while in other cases they are separate institutions. It is a complex environment because, even in a hypothetical situation in which all supervisory authorities were integrated in the central banks, this function would still be exercised at the level of the national jurisdiction. In other words, in a monetary union the need for coordination is twofold: coordination between the macro and the micro functions, and coordination between the authorities exercising the micro function locally. Some progress has been achieved with the creation of the three European supervisory authorities (for banking, markets and insurance) and the European Systemic Risk Board, which comprises the central banks and the three European agencies. The ESRB will be able to make recommendations, while implementation remains the responsibility of the national authorities. This crisis has shown the need for more than just increased cooperation, but rather institutions able to take timely and effective decisions. This is the direction that European integration will have to take going forward.I thank you for your attention.[1] See Kydland F. and E. Prescott (1977), “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans”, Journal of Political Economy, 85, pp. 473-492; and Barro R. and D. Gordon (1983), “Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy”. Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, pp.101-121.[2]See Blanchard O., Dell’Ariccia G. and P. Mauro (2010), “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy”, IMF Staff Position Note, No 10/03; and Svensson L. (2001), “The Zero Bound in an Open Economy: A Foolproof Way of Escaping from a Liquidity Trap”, Monetary and Economic Studies, 19, Bank of Japan, pp. 277–312.[3]See Eggertson G. and M. Woodford (2003), “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 34, pp. 139-211; and Walsh C. (2010), “Using Monetary Policy to Stabilize Economic Activity,” in Financial Stability and Macroeconomic Policy, 2009 Jackson Hole Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 245-296.[4]See Orphanides A. and S. van Norden (2002), “The Unreliability of Output-Gap Estimates in Real Time,” Review of Economics and Statistics 84, pp. 569-583; and Orphanides A. and S. van Norden (2005), “The Reliability of Inflation Forecasts Based on Output Gap Estimates in Real Time,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 37, pp. 583-601.[5]See Bini Smaghi L. (2010), “Could monetary policy have helped prevent the financial crisis?,” Bank of Canada, Toronto 9 April 2010.[6]See ECB (2010), “The “Great Inflation”: Lessons for monetary policy”, Monthly Bulletin, May 2010; and Orphanides A., (2002), “Monetary Policy Rules and the Great Inflation,” American Economic Review, 92, pp. 115–120.[7]See Taylor J. (2007), “Housing and Monetary Policy,” in Housing, Housing Finance, and Monetary Policy, Proceedings of Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming.[8]See Chen N., Imbs J. and A. Scott (2009), “The dynamics of trade and competition,” Journal of International Economics, 77, pp. 50-62.[9]See Rogoff K. (2006), “Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy,” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, The New Economic Geography: Effects and Policy Implications, pp. 265-305; and Pain N., Koske I. and M. Sollie (2006), “Globalisation and Inflation in the OECD Economies,” OECD Economics Department Working Paper, No. 524.[10]See Fahr S., Motto R., Rostagno M., Smets F. and O. Tristani (2010), “Lessons for monetary policy strategy from the recent past,” paper presented at the 6th ECB Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 18-19 November 2010. [11]See Adrian T. and H. S. Shin, (2010), “Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No 398; and Brunnermeier M. and L. Pedersen (2010), “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,” The Review of Financial Studies, 22, pp. 2201-2238; and Geanakoplos J. (2010), "" Solving the Present Crisis and Managing the Leverage Cycle,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, pp. 101-131.[12]See Fahr S., Motto R., Rostagno M., Smets F. and O. Tristani (2010), “Lessons for monetary policy strategy from the recent past,” paper presented at the 6th ECB Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 18-19 November 2010.[13]See Benati L. (2009), “Long-run evidence on money growth and inflation”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 1027. [14]See Adrian T. and H. S. Shin, (2010), “Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No 398; and Maddaloni A. and J.-L. Peydró, “ Bank Risk-Taking, Securitization, Supervision, and Low Interest Rates: Evidence from the Euro Area and U.S. Lending Standards”, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",financi crisi challeng period policymak worldwid least monetari author central bank lower interest rate level close zero implement broad rang unpreced nonstandard polici measur recent experi offer think five lesson monetari policymak learn let list upfront turn order remark today central bank independ remain critic deliv price stabil particular crise clear defin object price stabil essenti firm anchor inflat expect act automat stabilis crisi monetari polici orient medium term tri finetun monetari polici basi indic output gap measur core inflat either subject ex post revis mislead may often induc excess shortterm entail serious risk monetari financi variabl key input assess medium longrun risk price stabil particular financi crise final price stabil financi stabil complementari new macroprudenti function monetari polici reinforc valu central bank independ first last lesson cours central bank independ sine qua non effect monetari polici time possibl circumst central bank independ policymak quarter strong incent pass bank problem respons fact held account alway lead blur respons potenti loss trust ultim undermin effect monetari polici time crisi valu independ rise even perturb market condit central bank may implement extraordinari measur term reduc polici rate unpreced level term unconvent liquid measur measur untest expect exert impact econom decis seen market particip result autonom decis central bank ought seen consist overal polici framework rather result pressur fiscal author reason simpl central bank come pressur time crisi succumb pressur unlik behav differ good time therefor central bank extern constrain take except measur crisi abl resist pressur crisi end may disanchor inflat expect thus undermin effect measur implement crisi ecb made except financi crisi shaken global economi two full year meant explor new avenu monetari polici intervent experi new tool convent instrument blunt damag extent financi collaps true activ new tool sometim brought us closer line separ differ sphere policymak respons line previous consid remot howev fact crisi central bank broaden rang tool impli compromis object independ pursuit mandat case ecb institut framework singl monetari polici establish ecb independ choos instrument necessari achiev mandat price stabil cannot modifi mandat choos instrument time time consid effici attain object essenc instrument independ fundament cornerston contemporari theori practic central bank critic precondit central bank success tame inflat keep low stabl last year crucial role bank real economi euro area autumn start provid liquid unlimit volum longer matur bank june launch programm purchas eurodenomin cover bond issu euro area resid bank aim jumpstart market repres bright side securitis yet suffer consider crisi may persist excess govern borrow account fraud unleash debt run greec market uncertainti spread issuer localis loss confid soon develop generalis market paralysi virtual seizingup market govern paper signatur except credibl condit ecb decid interven new secur market programm purpos intervent still genuin monetari polici one market govern paper play central role financi system develop economi constitut crucial link upstream portion transmiss mechan channel monetari polici impuls real economi due power collater contemporari financi world presenc absenc collater money market transact qualiti collater use secur money market transact determin whether transmiss mechan start function block whether forese depend uncertain unreli perceiv qualiti collater influenc scale market spread overnight rate central bank lend bank money market spread first asset price whose order adjust import ensur monetari polici intent central bank convey broad economi addit one neglect fact govern secur provid basi privat debt instrument price would take argument one step suggest central bank use independ remind main polici actor time even crise respons act way may creat disincent author fiscal supervisori author key player implement accommod polici respons potenti seizingup financi market central bank shi away call fiscal author implement credibl mediumterm budgetari adjust would even consid precondit central bank enact polici otherwis uncertainti surround fiscal framework may contamin monetari polici general note accommod liquid polici entail atyp low interest rate need reinforc safeguard one hand need accompani healthi fiscal framework framework remov one prime sourc instabl instabl persist nonetheless broaden scope action open central bank key point ecb especi last month continu emphasis sever time task polit author ensur credibl fiscal framework compos appropri nation budgetari programm rigor surveil framework euro area level stabl safeti net underpin stabil euro area economi ecb also repeat call govern member state make leap forward improv institut framework under euro area made concret propos last month way improv fiscal macroeconom surveil under stabil growth pact address crise occur lot done need complet work state recent protect system market instabl also repeat call time consolid public financ contrast comment academ consolid start earlier rather pressur market would less pain pressur need exert supervisori fiscal author charg ensur solvenc financi institut uncondit suppli liquid central bank address system problem may creat disincent recapitalis restructur fragil part system thus delay recoveri provis liquid thus conduct way maintain incent financi institut supervisor take necessari measur restor normal quick possibl extraordinari measur implement within framework forese time exit condit allow second lesson taught crisi clear defin object price stabil act automat stabilis uncertainti becom destabilis alway true good time bad fact wellanchor expect euro area instrument avoid larg interest rate hike crisi commod price rose sharpli height crisi howev becam polici instrument right thank wellanchor inflat expect abl avoid deflationari spiral reduc real interest rate tandem nomin rate note inflat expect well anchor impervi transient shock actual inflat need manipul key paramet monetari polici framework e need increas inflat target move price level target order resist deflationari risk time macroeconom distress opportunist manipul monetari polici framework cours damag foundat framework rest abl reli rebalanc effect inflat expect superior option firm anchor inflat expect also make polici commit unnecessari commit concern futur cours polici rate view provid one effect instrument introduc stimulus room reduc nomin interest rate exhaust come price polici commit cannot effect unless materi constrain futur option abl reli firm inflat expect offer way reduc real rate provid stimulus without incur limit polici commit third lesson concern risk associ monetari polici aim finetun shortterm object experi especi prior crisi reveal risk design polici indic variabl suffici robust let give coupl exampl start output gap literatur clear shown empir proxi use captur output gap subject constant revis evid period output gap estim unit state ex post signific smaller realtim estim policymak base decis main assess cyclic posit serious led astray great inflat instanc larg extent due measur error realtim estim output gap combin overreact output gap measur assess state economi appli low interest rate implement prolong period middl last decad core inflat measur anoth exampl give mislead signal event persist chang relat price much lesson learn crisi phenomenon crisi expos one main factor precrisi great moder exampl abound exampl technolog innov concentr product good includ core inflat basket persist push select price also evid globalis depress price core cpi product due increas global competit tradabl good sector time price energi food product push demand emerg economi open global economi condit much emphasi core inflat distort polici infer core inflat provid policymak downward bias assess overal price pressur mistaken suggest procycl polici cours globalis world destabilis mechan distort perspect activ manifold today increas trade capit flow make monetari polici decis system import countri tight interact fact monetari polici decis industrialis countri find exchang rate arrang import emerg market economi potenti potent multipli exampl current accommod monetari polici industrialis countri generat liquid global level emerg market economi currenc free float limit sterilis intern capit inflow currenc peg lead generalis liquid spillov global scale time accumul foreign reserv emerg market economi lead downward pressur longterm interest rate global economi turn intensifi trend asset commod price thus potenti lead imbal global inflat set polici monetari policymak industrialis countri take dimens account monetari polici aim finetun shortterm object also run serious risk induc much polici forbear long exit extraordinarili accommod mode late sow seed futur imbal economi recov except deep recess realtim output gap estim estim structur unemploy nonacceler inflat rate unemploy nairu particular uncertain structur unemploy like signific risen mismatch skill worker lose job sector downsiz skill worker requir expand sector economi emphasi output gap measur instil convict unemploy could reduc monetari mean becom illus problem due structur mismatch skill labour market imperfect structur polici polici instrument address structur unemploy fourth lesson draw difficult time crisi certain prove convent wisdom last decad money matter even monetari polici wrong guess need emphasis alumni univers chicago money credit aggreg contain import inform allow policymak overcom pitfal relat econom indic inflat render dormant sequenc favour suppli side shock creat environ central bank might find extrem difficult rais interest rate even respons justifi bullish financi market sign econom overh condit incorpor monetari financi imbal polici process whether form monetari pillar form leaningagainstthewind attitud help support preemptiv polici even face subdu fall inflat reason simpl monetari credit imbal form alongsid would say symbiosi asset price trend indic price stabil might endang medium term react monetari side symbiosi may prevent larger problem occur subsequ addit monitor credit growth also use identifi sourc unsustain credit develop even cannot necessarili elimin monetari polici tool would instead requir action macroprudenti natur year forget macroeconom theori seem caught realiti shift attent credit leverag critic paramet central bank consult regular measur puls economi ecb consist use paramet even derid relic defunct monetari doctrin prove use gave inform financ condit financi structur well condit behaviour bank sourc inform critic assess health transmiss mechan broad state busi cycl dimens monetari analysi prove particular valuabl shape ecb respons financi crisi inde evid euro area without duli take monetari analysi account inflat euro area would distinct higher time financi exuber would fallen deep negat territori wake financi market collaps start autumn economi whole would volatil general note includ monetari analysi monetari strategi central bank ensur import inform stem money credit typic neglect convent cyclic forecast model economi consid formul monetari polici decis compel empir evid show low frequenc medium longerterm horizon inflat show robust posit associ monetari growth fifth lesson financi crisi ensur price stabil suffici financi stabil sure convent wisdom prevail crisi twofold first stabilis inflat would job inflat accord precrisi consensus summari statist state economi demand pressur exuber financi market would policyrelev unless exert upward pressur inflat second part consequ central bank pick piec bubbl burst cost relat polici resist bubbl form would larg prescript turn major mistak one thing inflat financi exuber often negat posit correl concentr central bank inflat mean bias assess risk macroeconomi longerterm perspect clean economi wake financi collaps exceed cost rais question whether central bank given task ensur price stabil financi stabil possibl given addit tool interlinkag financi stabil price stabil monetari polici prudenti supervis becom evid result crisi monetari polici affect system risk via number channel first mandat price stabil object central bank set place necessari condit financi stabil econom histori tell us without price stabil financi stabil certain absent either inflat hedg might take improvis destabilis form central bank go cycl gostop polici might becom independ sourc macroeconom instabl thus financi volatil rememb long span time unanchor inflat expect poor inflat record encourag sort selfmad strategi inflat hedg mani industrialis countri itali hous market exampl receiv formid boost italian attempt insur sustain loss purchas power soon monetari polici chang path embark decis stabilis inflat risk subsid hous price start plummet make disinflationari recess pain lack price stabil generat financi volatil financi volatil aggrav macroeconom uncertainti second channel monetari polici contribut financi stabil lenderoflastresort function financi market becom dysfunct monetari transmiss channel longer work proper monetari polici role play support liquid condit solvent illiquid bank mention describ ecb reaction crisi third recent analysi drawn attent channel monetari polici might also unintent influenc percept risk financi market thus ultim assumpt risk financi agent socal risktak channel financi institut appar increas leverag boom reduc recess thus contrari common assumpt financi institut leverag procycl expans contract balanc sheet amplifi rather counteract credit cycl protract loos monetari condit foster excess risktak consequenti produc buildup financi imbal accur control channel add procycl financi market two way counter financi procycl first monetari polici regim centr exclus inflat lean wind financi imbal mean mean exampl implement tighter polici face financi exuber would justifi inflat outlook tranquil market condit mean toler downdrift inflat exchang insur greater disrupt risk price financi stabil longer run second way counter financi procycl macroprudenti supervis new perspect macroeconom control macroprudenti supervis aim support stabil financi system seek dampen procycl elicit regulatori supervisori instrument central bank perspect impli macroprudenti supervis relev extent impact function transmiss mechan central bank seek influenc outlook price stabil clear two polici complementari one make redund think let advanc view correct way organis interact two leaningagainstthewind approach monetari polici prevent riskless interest rate floor borrow cost economi becom procycl macroprudenti polici make sure leverag economi creat floor interest rate spread paid riski borrow floor interest rate set central bank becom addit procycl sourc volatil financi system economi whole dimens supervis microprudenti polici note first differ macro micro macroprudenti supervis aim limit likelihood failur signific portion financi system system risk follow macroprudenti supervis stress possibl action may seem desir reason perspect individu institut may result unwelcom system outcom microprudenti supervis instead aim limit likelihood failur individu institut two polici clear differ scope ultim microprudenti sphere provid instrument activ respons macroprudenti risk issu attract attent past whether central bank entrust supervisori power instrument whether power remain within separ bodi take disput follow experi crisi tend suggest micro macroprudenti instrument well integr among function within central bank might desir alway make good sens coordin object instrument look natur coordin might best perform central bank independ bodi better abl deal necessari exchang inform monetari supervisori function build chines wall two may need avoid conflict interest progress made sinc erupt crisi sever countri supervisori power transfer separ institut mani case insuffici independ polit author central bank organis coordin role euro area context remain complex undertak due fact nation supervisori author sometim part nation central bank case separ institut complex environ even hypothet situat supervisori author integr central bank function would still exercis level nation jurisdict word monetari union need coordin twofold coordin macro micro function coordin author exercis micro function local progress achiev creation three european supervisori author bank market insur european system risk board compris central bank three european agenc esrb abl make recommend implement remain respons nation author crisi shown need increas cooper rather institut abl take time effect decis direct european integr take go forward thank attent see kydland f e prescott rule rather discret inconsist optim plan journal polit economi pp barro r d gordon rule discret reput model monetari polici journal monetari econom pp see blanchard o dell ariccia g p mauro rethink macroeconom polici imf staff posit note svensson l zero bound open economi foolproof way escap liquid trap monetari econom studi bank japan pp see eggertson g m woodford zero bound interest rate optim monetari polici brook paper econom activ pp walsh c use monetari polici stabil econom activ financi stabil macroeconom polici jackson hole symposium feder reserv bank kansa citi pp see orphanid van norden unreli outputgap estim real time review econom statist pp orphanid van norden reliabl inflat forecast base output gap estim real time journal money credit bank pp see bini smaghi l could monetari polici help prevent financi crisi bank canada toronto april see ecb great inflat lesson monetari polici month bulletin may orphanid monetari polici rule great inflat american econom review pp see taylor j hous monetari polici hous hous financ monetari polici proceed feder reserv bank kansa citi symposium jackson hole wyom see chen n imb j scott dynam trade competit journal intern econom pp see rogoff k impact global monetari polici feder reserv bank kansa citi new econom geographi effect polici implic pp pain n kosk m solli globalis inflat oecd economi oecd econom depart work paper see fahr motto r rostagno m smet f o tristani lesson monetari polici strategi recent past paper present th ecb central bank confer frankfurt main novemb see adrian h shin financi intermediari monetari econom feder reserv bank new york staff report brunnermei m l pedersen market liquid fund liquid review financi studi pp geanakoplo j solv present crisi manag leverag cycl feder reserv bank new york econom polici review pp see fahr motto r rostagno m smet f o tristani lesson monetari polici strategi recent past paper present th ecb central bank confer frankfurt main novemb see benati l longrun evid money growth inflat ecb work paper seri see adrian h shin financi intermediari monetari econom feder reserv bank new york staff report maddaloni j l peydró bank risktak securit supervis low interest rate evid euro area u lend standard review financi studi forthcom reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en