Jean-Claude Trichet: The crisis and its lessons,09-10-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,4235,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,It is a great pleasure for me to be at the University of Venice. Ca’ Foscari is one of the most prominent and vibrant universities in Italy. I know it is also one of the universities that is most open to international exchanges. Its blend of research excellence and cultural diversity makes it close to the ECB in spirit. The ECB is perhaps the most diverse central bank in the world in terms of its staff composition: more than 27 countries are represented in our ranks. And our economic departments constitute a relevant centre of economic analysis in Europe. As a central bank, we are prime consumers of economic research. For this reason, we maintain very close interactions with the academic world. We import tools and ideas and are eager to employ excellent economists from centres of advanced economic studies such as Ca’ Foscari. At the same time, the ECB is an active source of cutting edge economic thinking. I was very happy to see that last year our electronic Working Papers Series – posted on our web-site – attracted some 4 million downloads. A number of those articles have made significant contributions to macroeconomic research.I am also most delighted to be in Venice. This city talks both to the artist and to the economist. I have discovered that its name can be construed to signify its charm. As you will know, Francesco Sansovino, for example, claims that: ""[i]t is held by some that this word VENETIA signifies VENI ETIAM, that is, come again, and again, for however often you come, you will always see new things, and new beauties."" [1]But, for all its beauty, Venice was never a place of idle contemplation for its citizens. My countryman and great scholar of European civilizations, Fernand Braudel, chronicles that wealthy Venetian merchants in the early 1500s used to instruct their agents to “never leave ‘ li danari mortti’, money lying dead.” “Sell quickly, even at a lower price, in order to ‘ venier presto sul danaro per un altro viaggio.’” [2] It would be nearly impossible to find a more fitting description of the inner force that moves a market economy. In a vibrant market economy, money does not rest and is used to serve the creativity and the effort of undertaking enterprises. Let me start my remarks by recalling the origins of the crisis as I see them. Over past decades, our economies have greatly benefited from the effects of financial liberalisation and financial innovation. For example, the securitisation of assets has played a role in facilitating an efficient allocation of economic risks. It allowed the financial sector to offer credit for productive purposes, at more favourable conditions than was possible in the repressed credit systems of the past. More recently, however, managing genuine economic risk gradually ceased to be the main concern of international finance. Instead, the creation and assumption of financial risk became the core activity of the financial industry. The decoupling of financial positions from the underlying flows of goods and services gradually created the conditions for a credit boom. The credit boom was reinforced by an asset price boom, which credit itself was partly sustaining. Both the credit and the asset price expansion found formidable amplifiers in the microeconomics of the financial markets and in global imbalances. In the financial market, compensation schemes for bank loan managers weakened their incentive to conduct a prudent screening of loans. Executive pay was a function of overall volumes, which encouraged turn-over and the origination of loans. At the same time, risks could be shed – or so it seemed – by selling off the loan to other investors in the secondary market. As for these investors, increasingly complicated financial structures made it difficult for them to assess the quality of the assets that they were acquiring. They had to trust the originators. More than in the past, the viability of the financial system came to depend critically on trust and confidence. On a global scale, a chronic shortage of savings in some industrialised economies had to be financed out of an excess of savings in other parts of the world. So, international intermediation provided a potent fuel to the expansion of finance. In August 2007 – suddenly but not unexpectedly – trust and confidence started evaporating. The circular interactions between asset price appreciation, biased incentives, excessive complexity and global imbalances went into reverse. Market liquidity became scarce and investors extremely afraid of the risks that they had been exposing themselves to for so long. Finally, mid-September 2008, the collapse of a major financial player turned the re-pricing of risk into major financial panic. The chart of money market spreads tells this tale clearly.[ Chart 1: Money market spreads during the turmoil]As the collapse of confidence became evident, financial intermediaries made every possible attempt to restore liquidity buffers. Credit spreads soared. Financial market activity fell dramatically, and the global financial system came close to seizing up. [ Chart 2: Money market spreads during the crisis]The crisis triggered a freefall in economic activity. Within a few months, from January to July 2009, the distribution of GDP projections for the current year shifted to the left, increasingly into negative territory. To fully appreciate the massive change in perspective that this brought for all of us, compare the range of outcomes that were considered likely in successive rounds of forecast updates. In January, forecasters predicted on average a decline of 1.5% for this year. In March, they had become even more pessimistic, and they provided a decline of 2.5%. The uncertainty surrounding these forecasts was high, but even in March a decline of 4.5% was not seen as possible. This figure was outside the range of all forecasts and was a zero-probability event. Four months later, in July 2009, it became the central forecast. This shows the rapid and dramatic free-fall in economic activity. By now, in September, there has been a slight improvement, to a 3.9% contraction for this year. [ Chart 3: The economic free fall]Faced with such unprecedented challenges, central banks around the globe demonstrated a remarkable unity of purpose. Different economies, different channels of transmission called for different responses. In the end, the action taken by the leading central banks paid off. If I can return to my first picture, money market spreads – a symptom of the lack of trust that had gripped financial transactions in the early autumn – retreated from their peaks. They are now back at levels that were prevalent before the intensification of the crisis. [ Chart 4: Money market spreads: the decline]How did the ECB meet the challenge? The turmoil started on 9 August 2007. The ECB was in the vanguard among major central banks. It was first in identifying the severity of market distress, and the first to act on the very same day. As the financial debacle finally materialised, in the autumn 2008, the ECB’s approach to crisis management was diversified but consistent. We activated both conventional and non-conventional instruments of policy. We cut our key policy interest rate by 325 basis points, bringing it to a level that has no historical precedent in post-World War Europe. In parallel, we adopted a wide spectrum of “non-standard” measures. They were designed to ensure that the reductions in our policy instrument were transmitted to the broader credit market and the economy at large. These non-standard measures are part of what we collectively define as our policy of “enhanced credit support”. [ Chart 5: Non-standard measures]This policy comprises five building blocks: First, full accommodation of banks’ demand for central bank liquidity at fixed interest rates in our refinancing operations. Second, a further expansion in the list of assets eligible for use as collateral in our refinancing operations.Third, a further extension of the range of maturities at which liquidity is made available to banks in our refinancing operations. The longest maturity is now one year. Fourth, provision of liquidity in foreign currencies, notably US dollars. Fifth and finally, a direct covered bank bond purchase programme aimed at reviving a segment of the financial market that is important in Europe.Let me emphasise only a few selective aspects of this policy. First, our primary mission is to preserve price stability. It implies that the transmission of monetary policy impulses is functioning correctly and that the money market is not disrupted. In this new unexpected situation we had to tackle the paralysis of inter-bank transactions in the money market. The money market is where banks can refinance their assets as a precondition for rolling over their loans to the economy. The flow of credit is primarily channelled by banks in the euro area. A complete breakdown in the funding relationships that constitute the money market would have derailed the bank lending channel altogether. The interruption of the bank lending channel would have turned the financial crisis into a very profound depression. By granting unlimited access to central bank liquidity – the “fixed-rate full-allotment” tender procedures – we put banks in a position to maintain their crucial role in the financing of the real economy. By expanding the list of eligible collateral, we ensured that banks could refinance that large proportion of their assets that had become less liquid in the crisis. By extending the maturity of their liquidity provisions, we gave banks a more medium-term perspective in their liquidity planning. This measure greatly attenuated the maturity mismatch between assets and liabilities in banks’ books, which would otherwise have further deterred bank lending activity. We have also been providing foreign exchange liquidity. This primarily took the form of US dollar liquidity backed by a swap facility with the US Federal Reserve System. The malfunctioning of the foreign exchange swap market had made the currency mismatch in banks’ balance sheets extremely severe. Thanks to our policy, they could count on ongoing access to foreign currency balances. This policy was made possible by the very close cooperation between central banks in the crisis. Finally, the Governing Council’s decision to intervene directly in the financial market by purchasing covered bonds was meant to re-ignite activity in a market segment that is particularly important as a source of funding for banks. Our enhanced credit support policies have boosted market liquidity. Through that channel – as I showed a few minutes ago – the reductions in our policy instrument could be transmitted to a whole spectrum of interest rates that are used as re-setting benchmarks for adjustable-rate loan contracts. This has greatly benefited households and firms. But what is the link between liquidity and price stability? Will enhanced liquidity provision trigger inflation sometime in the less proximate future? In this respect, let me emphasise two important aspects of our exceptional policies. The first aspect is related to the definition of liquidity. Our non-standard measures have increased central bank liquidity – cash reserves that the Eurosystem makes available to banks in refinancing operations. But this has not led to an increase in broader monetary aggregates. In fact, broad measures of money growth are decelerating in the euro area. In normal times, banks would use an increase in our liquidity provision to expand credit to households and enterprises. In current conditions, however, liquidity primarily takes the form of precautionary balances that certain banks are deliberately holding with the Eurosystem. As long as central bank liquidity serves at least in part banks’ precautionary motives, this extra liquidity will not result in higher inflation in the future. These considerations bring me to the second aspect of our non-standard policies: the conditions for their unwinding. Exceptional times have called for exceptional measures. But we will need to phase out these measures once the rationale for their adoption fades away and the situation normalises. The Governing Council believes that it would be premature today to think that the crisis has been overcome and conquered in a sustainable manner. So, it is not the time to exit yet. Our future decisions on the phasing-out of non-standard measures will be guided by a transparent exit strategy. This exit strategy has been designed around four cornerstones. [ Chart 6: Cornerstones of the exit strategy]First, it will be linked to our primary objective and thus to our monetary policy strategy. The crisis has not changed the ECB’s primary objective. This means that any non-standard measure whose continuation would compromise the maintenance of price stability at any time in the future will be undone promptly and unequivocally. Second, the forward-looking initial design of the measures will help us wind them down when the time is ripe. The ECB’s non-standard measures were designed with exit considerations in mind. A number of measures – think of our refinancing operations – will phase out naturally by design. At the same time, the size and scope of the outright purchases have been calibrated so that they would not interfere with the implementation of appropriate liquidity conditions in a phase of interest rate increases. Third, the ECB has the technical and institutional capability to act. The operational framework of the ECB proved very resilient at the start of the turmoil. It is also sufficiently flexible and reliable to fit all possible situations which could realistically arise in the future. On the institutional side, the Governing Council has the unfettered capacity to decide and institute appropriate policies whenever circumstances warrant this. The ECB rests on a strong institutional platform, with a clear dividing line between what pertains to the central bank and what belongs to the fiscal sphere of responsibility. Fourth, the Governing Council can mobilise its reputation for swift and decisive action whenever that reputation will be required to support the credibility of its policies. Over the past decade, our institution has established a clear track record of steady-handedness. This is also because market participants know that we are permanently alert and that we act decisively and in a timely fashion when conditions so demand. The ECB’s “steady-handed approach” to conventional monetary policy action has not impeded, in fact it has strengthened, a swift transmission of policy changes to market rates and to credit conditions more broadly. This was possible for two reasons. First, steady-handedness makes policy changes more powerful. Private sector expectations regarding future interest rates adjust and move in a manner consistent with policy-makers’ intentions at all maturities. Second, interest rate reductions have been reinforced by our non-standard monetary policy measures. These policies have made financial intermediaries less reluctant to pass on the degree of credit easing that the ECB wanted to implement. All in all, there are encouraging signs that the substantial stimulus introduced is gradually bearing fruit. The negative inflationary readings over the summer have been due to large declines in the price of crude oil in relation to the previous year. In this sense, the fall in inflation – by boosting the purchasing power of our citizens – has acted as an automatic stabiliser at a time in which the economic conditions were deteriorating. Inflation expectations are a good measure of the degree to which the free fall in the economy and the dis-inflationary process could come to feed upon itself. They have remained stable around levels consistent with our definition of price stability. [ Chart 7: Inflation expectations in the euro area]The economy, too, is showing signs of stabilisation. After the strongly negative readings recorded earlier this year, economic activity in the second quarter is estimated to have declined by 0.2% relative to the previous quarter. In the period ahead, we expect to see a very gradual recovery. While the statistical risks to this outlook remain broadly balanced, there is no room for complacency and we are, as always, alert to any unexpected developments. On the upside, the impact of the macroeconomic stimulus packages and other policy measures may prove to be stronger than currently foreseen. On the downside, the negative feedback between the real economy and the still strained financial sector may prove more protracted than expected. What lessons can we learn from the financial crisis that has shaken our world so profoundly? The crisis has exposed the fundamental fragility of the international financial system. I had mentioned that the macroeconomic situation shows signs of stabilisation. We expect a very gradual recovery ahead, but substantial risks remain. We have to consider all aspects of finance very seriously. The financial system needs to be as immunised as possible against its intrinsic tendency towards complacency, irresponsibility and self-destruction. Three intrinsic weaknesses need correction.First, the pro-cyclicality of the financial system needs to be mitigated by mechanisms that can provide built-in stabilisers. The quality and quantity of bank capital and banks’ liquidity buffers have to be improved in good times to provide a sufficient buffer for bank equity to withstand the inevitable increase in credit risk when the cycle turns. The cyclicality of market economies is inevitable. But the financial system should not be allowed to amplify swings.Second, the transparency of the financial structures needs to be enhanced. Financial innovation cannot be built upon – and exploit – gaps in investor information and a lack of financial literacy. Well-informed decisions by market agents are a key element of any functioning market economy. All institutions, instruments and markets that are of any relevance for systemic stability need to enhance their risk disclosure. The reach of financial regulation needs to be extended to better reflect the role of highly leveraged institutions and prevent abuse in the derivatives markets.Third, short-termism in the design of financial contracts needs to be corrected. Market participants – traders, loan managers, risk committees and boards of directors – were given strong economic incentives to focus on short-term profits. Long-term value creation was not a concern in the pre-crisis world. Collectively, this resulted in excessive risk taking. In tune with the last G-20 pledge, a reform of the executive compensation schemes and practices is an essential part of our effort to secure financial stability.Far from putting off the agenda for structural reforms, the crisis has made them more urgent. No segment of the market or category of players has been immune to the crisis. The list of areas that proved dysfunctional can be extended to include the risk management and credit assessment of banks, accounting standards, audit quality, supervision, and many more elements. No market segment or financial actor should escape profound rethinking. This rethinking should have the scope and ambition of a paradigm change. The new paradigm should be based on three notions.First, medium-term and long-term sustainability in macroeconomic policies and financial strategies should replace the myopic perspective that is always a temptation. Herd behaviour in the financial markets might have two parallels in the macroeconomic sphere. These are: profligate fiscal policies in times of boom and over-accommodating monetary policy in downturns. A new medium-term perspective should concentrate policies on medium-term objectives. Like financial contracts, policies should not amplify economic fluctuations. Second, authorities and major players in the financial scene should immunize themselves against complacency. The crisis has proved that unpredictable shocks, however unlikely, can compound in the aggregate. In these conditions, historical correlations of risks become an insufficient instrument to check the resilience of an institution or the system as a whole. A constant monitoring of resilience should become part of the new regime. Third, the approach should be holistic. The global proportions of the crisis call for a rethinking of the links between financial behaviour and macroeconomic policies. This has two implications. The first concerns domestic governance. Major economies need to complement their micro-prudential apparatus with a new macro-prudential function. Macroeconomic resilience calls for a systemic analysis of risk. Macro-prudential supervision offers this type of analysis and can act as a countervailing force to the tendency of the financial system to amplify economic swings. A far-reaching reform in this direction is underway in the EU. A new European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) will be created which will detect risks to the EU financial system and issue warnings and recommendations to national supervisors. The second implication concerns international macro-governance. Over the last year, efforts to find new fora in which risks to the global economic order can be identified, discussed and addressed have intensified. Throughout the turbulent times, coordinated guidelines have been put forward at the European and international levels by the Financial Stability Forum, the Eurogroup and the European Council. They were reflected in the declarations of the G-20 summits. The G-20 itself has emerged as the premier forum for international economic dialogue. Within the G-20, I find it encouraging that there is now a broad consensus between the emerging market economies and the industrialised countries on the principal directions of financial reform. In this field, I see a very strong consensus in the global community of central banks. As first signs of recovery can be observed and as banks are returning to profitability, it is important to keep up momentum and to proceed with the further steps that are necessary to ensure that events of such intensity do not recur in the future. Yet, in the new economic order that will emerge these fora – and each single macroeconomic authority that is represented at the table – will share a precisely defined responsibility: the correction of global imbalances. Trade and financial imbalances were a major source of instability in the pre-crisis world. Now, it is the precise mandate of the world economic leaders to identify a pattern of growth across countries that is more sustainable and balanced. They need to evaluate whether the macroeconomic policies that are enacted domestically by the major economic players are collectively consistent with more sustainable and balanced growth worldwide.For this process to be effective, peer pressure needs to be made more compelling than it was in the past. Let me say a few words on Italy. The Italian economy is undergoing an unprecedented adjustment, as are virtually all developed countries throughout the world. Many Italian enterprises, in particular small and medium-sized ones, are currently dealing with very challenging times. I am confident that they will emerge from present hardships with leaner cost structures and a more efficient organisation of production processes. In the end, the entrepreneurial spirit that is in the genes of this nation will prevail. The financial crisis, the macroeconomic response to it and the lessons that we need to learn have been the themes of my talk today. My main message is that despite all the difficulties, the crisis is an opportunity for this continent and for this country in particular. Italy is a country that has traditionally gained confidence in the severest of circumstances. I therefore hope that reflections on the causes and lessons of the crisis can contribute to economic reform that can bring a new era of progress for Italy. First of all, the crisis has shown the health of private finance in Italy. Italy never indulged in the financial excesses of the recent past. It remains an economy, where finance is first and foremost support for real economic production. Strong saving propensities and prudent banking represent a platform of security from which the economy can restart. But economic reforms cannot be delayed. The crisis can be the trigger for an ambitious plan to modernise the Italian economy and to make it more dynamic. Labour market institutions need to be overhauled to make labour compensation better reflect individual effort and firm-level excellence. The pricing chain – notably in the service sector – needs to be streamlined to increase the flexibility of prices. Welfare-enhancing positions that are a drain on disposable incomes and the economic potential of the country need to be discarded. I would like to encourage policy makers to tackle these issues. Bold efforts by central banks and governments around the world have been effective in containing the propagation of a formidable shock. But short-term steps to alleviate the crisis need to be reinforced by longer-term reforms that can inhibit the development of bubbles, stabilise financial markets and provide greater financial security to households and businesses.A number of elements and – one might even say “totems and taboos” – of the pre-crisis economic universe have now lost most of their value. This applies to individual financial players and business models alike. Other elements, however, have maintained their worth. It is on these latter elements that we should build the future of this continent. The euro – the single currency – and the macroeconomic framework of the Union have certainly proved their strength in the last 12 months. The countries of Europe were not left to weather the storm alone. The financial maelstrom has not turned into any national debacle. A medium-term-oriented macroeconomic framework had helped – before the crisis – to put Europe on a solid ground. Those solid foundations have enabled it to withstand the onslaught.In the end, the strength to overcome the present hardships will come from the inside. Our openness to trade, our balanced and dynamic business structures, our talented and well-trained workforces are part of our future. We know that technological progress will continue unabated in Europe. Companies and people will continue to prove their entrepreneurial spirit in large and small organisations. Reflection and endurance will be rewarded by a sense of personal fulfilment and by collective progress. Private thrift and a sense of prudent housekeeping are Europe’s primary safeguards against the risk of developing into a bubble economy. All this will be the engine that will steer the economy towards tomorrow’s recovery. Thank you for your attention.[1]  Francesco Sansovino, Venetia città nobilissima et singolare, Venice, 1581.[2]  Cited in F. Braudel, “ Civilization and Capitalism, 15th-18th Century: The Wheels of Commerce” University of California Press, 1992.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur univers venic ca foscari one promin vibrant univers itali know also one univers open intern exchang blend research excel cultur divers make close ecb spirit ecb perhap divers central bank world term staff composit countri repres rank econom depart constitut relev centr econom analysi europ central bank prime consum econom research reason maintain close interact academ world import tool idea eager employ excel economist centr advanc econom studi ca foscari time ecb activ sourc cut edg econom think happi see last year electron work paper seri post websit attract million download number articl made signific contribut macroeconom research also delight venic citi talk artist economist discov name constru signifi charm know sansovino exampl claim held word venetia signifi veni etiam come howev often come alway see new thing new beauti beauti venic never place idl contempl citizen countryman great scholar european civil fernand braudel chronicl wealthi venetian merchant earli use instruct agent never leav li danari mortti money lie dead sell quick even lower price order venier presto sul danaro per un altro viaggio would near imposs find fit descript inner forc move market economi vibrant market economi money rest use serv creativ effort undertak enterpris let start remark recal origin crisi see past decad economi great benefit effect financi liberalis financi innov exampl securitis asset play role facilit effici alloc econom risk allow financi sector offer credit product purpos favour condit possibl repress credit system past recent howev manag genuin econom risk gradual ceas main concern intern financ instead creation assumpt financi risk becam core activ financi industri decoupl financi posit under flow good servic gradual creat condit credit boom credit boom reinforc asset price boom credit part sustain credit asset price expans found formid amplifi microeconom financi market global imbal financi market compens scheme bank loan manag weaken incent conduct prudent screen loan execut pay function overal volum encourag turnov origin loan time risk could shed seem sell loan investor secondari market investor increas complic financi structur made difficult assess qualiti asset acquir trust origin past viabil financi system came depend critic trust confid global scale chronic shortag save industrialis economi financ excess save part world intern intermedi provid potent fuel expans financ august sudden unexpect trust confid start evapor circular interact asset price appreci bias incent excess complex global imbal went revers market liquid becam scarc investor extrem afraid risk expos long final midseptemb collaps major financi player turn repric risk major financi panic chart money market spread tell tale clear chart money market spread turmoil collaps confid becam evid financi intermediari made everi possibl attempt restor liquid buffer credit spread soar financi market activ fell dramat global financi system came close seiz chart money market spread crisi crisi trigger freefal econom activ within month januari juli distribut gdp project current year shift left increas negat territori fulli appreci massiv chang perspect brought us compar rang outcom consid like success round forecast updat januari forecast predict averag declin year march becom even pessimist provid declin uncertainti surround forecast high even march declin seen possibl figur outsid rang forecast zeroprob event four month later juli becam central forecast show rapid dramat freefal econom activ septemb slight improv contract year chart econom free fall face unpreced challeng central bank around globe demonstr remark uniti purpos differ economi differ channel transmiss call differ respons end action taken lead central bank paid return first pictur money market spread symptom lack trust grip financi transact earli autumn retreat peak back level preval intensif crisi chart money market spread declin ecb meet challeng turmoil start august ecb vanguard among major central bank first identifi sever market distress first act day financi debacl final materialis autumn ecb approach crisi manag diversifi consist activ convent nonconvent instrument polici cut key polici interest rate basi point bring level histor preced postworld war europ parallel adopt wide spectrum nonstandard measur design ensur reduct polici instrument transmit broader credit market economi larg nonstandard measur part collect defin polici enhanc credit support chart nonstandard measur polici compris five build block first full accommod bank demand central bank liquid fix interest rate refinanc oper second expans list asset elig use collater refinanc oper third extens rang matur liquid made avail bank refinanc oper longest matur one year fourth provis liquid foreign currenc notabl us dollar fifth final direct cover bank bond purchas programm aim reviv segment financi market import europ let emphasis select aspect polici first primari mission preserv price stabil impli transmiss monetari polici impuls function correct money market disrupt new unexpect situat tackl paralysi interbank transact money market money market bank refin asset precondit roll loan economi flow credit primarili channel bank euro area complet breakdown fund relationship constitut money market would derail bank lend channel altogeth interrupt bank lend channel would turn financi crisi profound depress grant unlimit access central bank liquid fixedr fullallot tender procedur put bank posit maintain crucial role financ real economi expand list elig collater ensur bank could refin larg proport asset becom less liquid crisi extend matur liquid provis gave bank mediumterm perspect liquid plan measur great attenu matur mismatch asset liabil bank book would otherwis deter bank lend activ also provid foreign exchang liquid primarili took form us dollar liquid back swap facil us feder reserv system malfunct foreign exchang swap market made currenc mismatch bank balanc sheet extrem sever thank polici could count ongo access foreign currenc balanc polici made possibl close cooper central bank crisi final govern council decis interven direct financi market purchas cover bond meant reignit activ market segment particular import sourc fund bank enhanc credit support polici boost market liquid channel show minut ago reduct polici instrument could transmit whole spectrum interest rate use reset benchmark adjustabler loan contract great benefit household firm link liquid price stabil enhanc liquid provis trigger inflat sometim less proxim futur respect let emphasis two import aspect except polici first aspect relat definit liquid nonstandard measur increas central bank liquid cash reserv eurosystem make avail bank refinanc oper led increas broader monetari aggreg fact broad measur money growth deceler euro area normal time bank would use increas liquid provis expand credit household enterpris current condit howev liquid primarili take form precautionari balanc certain bank deliber hold eurosystem long central bank liquid serv least part bank precautionari motiv extra liquid result higher inflat futur consider bring second aspect nonstandard polici condit unwind except time call except measur need phase measur rational adopt fade away situat normalis govern council believ would prematur today think crisi overcom conquer sustain manner time exit yet futur decis phasingout nonstandard measur guid transpar exit strategi exit strategi design around four cornerston chart cornerston exit strategi first link primari object thus monetari polici strategi crisi chang ecb primari object mean nonstandard measur whose continu would compromis mainten price stabil time futur undon prompt unequivoc second forwardlook initi design measur help us wind time ripe ecb nonstandard measur design exit consider mind number measur think refinanc oper phase natur design time size scope outright purchas calibr would interfer implement appropri liquid condit phase interest rate increas third ecb technic institut capabl act oper framework ecb prove resili start turmoil also suffici flexibl reliabl fit possibl situat could realist aris futur institut side govern council unfett capac decid institut appropri polici whenev circumst warrant ecb rest strong institut platform clear divid line pertain central bank belong fiscal sphere respons fourth govern council mobilis reput swift decis action whenev reput requir support credibl polici past decad institut establish clear track record steadyhanded also market particip know perman alert act decis time fashion condit demand ecb steadyhand approach convent monetari polici action imped fact strengthen swift transmiss polici chang market rate credit condit broad possibl two reason first steadyhanded make polici chang power privat sector expect regard futur interest rate adjust move manner consist policymak intent matur second interest rate reduct reinforc nonstandard monetari polici measur polici made financi intermediari less reluct pass degre credit eas ecb want implement encourag sign substanti stimulus introduc gradual bear fruit negat inflationari read summer due larg declin price crude oil relat previous year sens fall inflat boost purchas power citizen act automat stabilis time econom condit deterior inflat expect good measur degre free fall economi disinflationari process could come feed upon remain stabl around level consist definit price stabil chart inflat expect euro area economi show sign stabilis strong negat read record earlier year econom activ second quarter estim declin relat previous quarter period ahead expect see gradual recoveri statist risk outlook remain broad balanc room complac alway alert unexpect develop upsid impact macroeconom stimulus packag polici measur may prove stronger current foreseen downsid negat feedback real economi still strain financi sector may prove protract expect lesson learn financi crisi shaken world profound crisi expos fundament fragil intern financi system mention macroeconom situat show sign stabilis expect gradual recoveri ahead substanti risk remain consid aspect financ serious financi system need immunis possibl intrins tendenc toward complac irrespons selfdestruct three intrins weak need correct first procycl financi system need mitig mechan provid builtin stabilis qualiti quantiti bank capit bank liquid buffer improv good time provid suffici buffer bank equiti withstand inevit increas credit risk cycl turn cyclic market economi inevit financi system allow amplifi swing second transpar financi structur need enhanc financi innov cannot built upon exploit gap investor inform lack financi literaci wellinform decis market agent key element function market economi institut instrument market relev system stabil need enhanc risk disclosur reach financi regul need extend better reflect role high leverag institut prevent abus deriv market third shortterm design financi contract need correct market particip trader loan manag risk committe board director given strong econom incent focus shortterm profit longterm valu creation concern precrisi world collect result excess risk take tune last g pledg reform execut compens scheme practic essenti part effort secur financi stabil far put agenda structur reform crisi made urgent segment market categori player immun crisi list area prove dysfunct extend includ risk manag credit assess bank account standard audit qualiti supervis mani element market segment financi actor escap profound rethink rethink scope ambit paradigm chang new paradigm base three notion first mediumterm longterm sustain macroeconom polici financi strategi replac myopic perspect alway temptat herd behaviour financi market might two parallel macroeconom sphere proflig fiscal polici time boom overaccommod monetari polici downturn new mediumterm perspect concentr polici mediumterm object like financi contract polici amplifi econom fluctuat second author major player financi scene immun complac crisi prove unpredict shock howev unlik compound aggreg condit histor correl risk becom insuffici instrument check resili institut system whole constant monitor resili becom part new regim third approach holist global proport crisi call rethink link financi behaviour macroeconom polici two implic first concern domest govern major economi need complement microprudenti apparatus new macroprudenti function macroeconom resili call system analysi risk macroprudenti supervis offer type analysi act countervail forc tendenc financi system amplifi econom swing farreach reform direct underway eu new european system risk board esrb creat detect risk eu financi system issu warn recommend nation supervisor second implic concern intern macrogovern last year effort find new fora risk global econom order identifi discuss address intensifi throughout turbul time coordin guidelin put forward european intern level financi stabil forum eurogroup european council reflect declar g summit g emerg premier forum intern econom dialogu within g find encourag broad consensus emerg market economi industrialis countri princip direct financi reform field see strong consensus global communiti central bank first sign recoveri observ bank return profit import keep momentum proceed step necessari ensur event intens recur futur yet new econom order emerg fora singl macroeconom author repres tabl share precis defin respons correct global imbal trade financi imbal major sourc instabl precrisi world precis mandat world econom leader identifi pattern growth across countri sustain balanc need evalu whether macroeconom polici enact domest major econom player collect consist sustain balanc growth worldwid process effect peer pressur need made compel past let say word itali italian economi undergo unpreced adjust virtual develop countri throughout world mani italian enterpris particular small mediums one current deal challeng time confid emerg present hardship leaner cost structur effici organis product process end entrepreneuri spirit gene nation prevail financi crisi macroeconom respons lesson need learn theme talk today main messag despit difficulti crisi opportun contin countri particular itali countri tradit gain confid severest circumst therefor hope reflect caus lesson crisi contribut econom reform bring new era progress itali first crisi shown health privat financ itali itali never indulg financi excess recent past remain economi financ first foremost support real econom product strong save propens prudent bank repres platform secur economi restart econom reform cannot delay crisi trigger ambiti plan modernis italian economi make dynam labour market institut need overhaul make labour compens better reflect individu effort firmlevel excel price chain notabl servic sector need streamlin increas flexibl price welfareenhanc posit drain dispos incom econom potenti countri need discard would like encourag polici maker tackl issu bold effort central bank govern around world effect contain propag formid shock shortterm step allevi crisi need reinforc longerterm reform inhibit develop bubbl stabilis financi market provid greater financi secur household busi number element one might even say totem taboo precrisi econom univers lost valu appli individu financi player busi model alik element howev maintain worth latter element build futur contin euro singl currenc macroeconom framework union certain prove strength last month countri europ left weather storm alon financi maelstrom turn nation debacl mediumtermori macroeconom framework help crisi put europ solid ground solid foundat enabl withstand onslaught end strength overcom present hardship come insid open trade balanc dynam busi structur talent welltrain workforc part futur know technolog progress continu unab europ compani peopl continu prove entrepreneuri spirit larg small organis reflect endur reward sens person fulfil collect progress privat thrift sens prudent housekeep europ primari safeguard risk develop bubbl economi engin steer economi toward tomorrow recoveri thank attent sansovino venetia città nobilissima et singolar venic cite f braudel civil capit th th centuri wheel commerc univers california press reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en