Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Building and preserving trust – Challenges for the financial community,15-04-2008,European Central Bank,ECB,2326,"<p>A dinner speech should fulfil two criteria: It should not spoil the mood of the guests, and it should not be too long. Given that I will be talking about financial sector developments, this will be a very difficult task, but I will try my best. I am delighted to be able to share my thoughts with you tonight and would like to thank the organisers for inviting me to do so. The International Chamber of Commerce has a long history of establishing international standards. I very much welcome this setting of standards, as it is the motor of further financial integration, efficient banking and sound management practices. However, in the light of the ongoing financial market turmoil, more rigorous thinking about banks’ risk taking and risk mitigation could be on the agenda for the years to come.In my speech tonight, I will talk from a euro area and ECB perspective. First, I will elaborate on the economic outlook for the euro area. Second, I will explain the clear distinction that we at the ECB, as well as many other central banks, make between our decisions on the level of the key interest rates and the provision of liquidity to banks. Taking a longer-term perspective, it is clear that both the private sector and the authorities worldwide will have to undergo fundamental changes in their modes of operation. Third, I will therefore give you my view on the challenges facing the private sector and then describe the follow-up responses of international institutions and authorities. I will close with a few words on the importance of continued progress in furthering financial integration in Europe. The financial turmoil has affected the global economy. So far, however, the effect on the euro area economy appears to have been limited, the fundamentals of the euro area economy are sound. The latest information on economic activity confirms the picture of moderate but ongoing growth. Looking ahead, both domestic and foreign demand are expected to support real GDP growth in 2008. Although growth in the world economy is moderating, it is expected to remain resilient, benefiting in particular from strong growth in emerging market economies. In the euro area, capacity utilisation is high, profitability has been sustained and so far there have been no significant signs of supply constraints on bank loans. In addition, employment and labour force participation have increased significantly and unemployment rates have fallen to levels not seen for 25 years. Nonetheless, this outlook for economic growth remains subject to an unusually high degree of uncertainty, as well as to downside risks relating mainly to a potentially broader impact of financial market developments on activity than currently foreseen, and additional increases in commodity prices.On the inflation side, the picture is less positive. HICP inflation currently stands at levels significantly above 3%, with inflationary pressures stemming mainly from increases in oil and food commodity prices. Looking ahead, the annual HICP inflation rate is likely to remain significantly above 2% in the coming months, moderating only gradually over the course of 2008. Risks to the medium-term inflation outlook remain clearly on the upside, due mainly to the possibility of further rises in oil and agricultural prices and of wage growth and firms’ pricing power being stronger than currently expected. The ECB’s monetary analysis confirms the assessment that upside risks to price stability over the medium to longer term prevail. Money and credit growth are very vigorous in the euro area. On 10 April, we decided to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. We are convinced that the current monetary policy stance will contribute to achieving the price stability objective and we remain strongly committed to preventing second-round effects and the materialisation of upside risks to price stability over the medium term.The ECB has made – in this period of financial turbulence too – a clear distinction between the decisions on the level of the key ECB interest rates and the provision of liquidity aimed at ensuring an orderly functioning of the money market. Therefore, with the start of the turmoil in August 2007, the ECB countered the tensions in the money market by changing the timing of the liquidity provision within the maintenance period and increasing its average maturity through additional longer-term refinancing operations. The ECB’s measures did not add to the overall stock of liquidity and left the average supply of liquidity unchanged over the full reserve maintainance period. Overall, thanks to its flexible design, the Eurosystem’s operational framework has thus far proved to be resilient and effective in the current circumstances and the ECB has succeeded in steering the overnight rate close to the key policy rate set by the Governing Council. Let me now move to the key challenges for financial institutions and markets in general over the coming months. I would like to start by stressing that it is my firm belief that many of the weaknesses highlighted by the recent events can be addressed by market-led initiatives and self-regulation. Nonetheless, it seems that regulatory measures are needed too.  The first challenge is to improve market transparency. The market correction has demonstrated the importance of the disclosure and valuation of risks. In particular, better disclosure of risks, as well as accounting and risk management practices, is of the essence in the short term. In the medium term, financial institutions should identify key risks and disclose information that is relevant to major stakeholders. The second challenge is related to the valuation of complex structured credit products – a task that has proved to be very difficult over the past few months. The current techniques are typically based on market prices, making them vulnerable to a change in investor sentiment. To mitigate the problem, the market has to enhance valuation processes, in particular by finding ways to improve the quality of inputs to their valuation models, even in the event that market data are not available. Credible valuation techniques are fundamental for maintaining trust among counterparties. The third challenge for banks is to address vulnerabilities in their liquidity management practices. Banks have relied increasingly on wholesale funding. This has rendered some of them vulnerable to a sudden disruption in the markets. The recent experience has spurred committees, both at the international and the EU level, into carrying out important work on liquidity risk. However, it should be noted that market-led initiatives are also under way, for example those being led by the Institute of International Finance. The fourth and final challenge that I will mention today is that institutions should live up to their social responsibility. This issue has also been highlighted by the European Commission, which is exploring ways to promote responsible lending in mortgage credit markets. [1] Socially responsible behaviour is key to creating sustainable value for all stakeholders. In the global and competitive financial markets of today, pressure for short-term results may have a negative effect on incentives. This is particularly relevant in a market characterised by information asymmetries. Building, preserving and valuing trust is not an unattainable ideal, but one that can be concretely translated into business objectives and practices. Such an undertaking requires, among other things, effective corporate governance arrangements that are supported by a strong corporate culture. Let me now say a few words on the regulatory and supervisory follow-up that has taken place so far. The global nature of the market turbulence requires enhanced cross-border consistency in financial regulation and supervision. Consequently, the identification of the key issues and the measures to be taken over the coming months is based on cooperation and a common understanding, both at the EU and the global level.Let me start by addressing the initiatives in Europe, moving from the initiatives that are already under way and which will also have a positive impact in terms of addressing challenges and providing responses to the recent events in the financial markets.The first strand of initiatives relates to enhancing the framework for financial supervision. The first full review of the functioning of the Lamfalussy process conducted by the ECOFIN Council in December 2007 revealed a general consensus among EU bodies that there is a need for enhancing the functioning of the Lamfalussy approach. In this context, a number of possible improvements have been agreed recently, including giving a European mandate to national supervisors; requiring national supervisors to take into account the European dimension in their work towards a more united implementation of EU regulations; strengthening the functioning of the various committees of supervisors; and reinforcing the supervision of cross-border financial groups. Regarding the latter, the enhancement of the role of supervisory colleges (which have been set up by the Committee of European Banking Supervisors for major EU banks) will be an important development in the pursuit of supervisory convergence, as well as a means for strengthening cooperation and improving the exchange of information. Second, in April 2008, the EU central banks, supervisors and finance ministries adopted a Memorandum of Understanding on cross-border cooperation in financial crisis situations between supervisory authorities, central banks and finance ministries.Coming back to the initiatives specifically addressing the recent developments, the European finance ministers have agreed on a road map for policy responses to the financial turmoil, with four main objectives: (i) improving transparency for investors, markets and regulators; (ii) improving valuation standards; (iii) reinforcing the prudential framework, including liquidity risk management; and (iv) improving the functioning of the market, including the role of credit rating agencies. In parallel with the work at the EU level, there are initiatives taken by global policy fora. In this context, I would like to draw your attention to the work carried out by the Financial Stability Forum, which prepared its final report on strengthening the resilience of markets and institutions for the meeting of the G7 Finance Ministers last week. [2] In particular, the report calls for strengthening the Basel II capital requirements (particularly for structured credit products and securitisation activities), enhanced liquidity risk management, the effective prudential oversight of relevant risks, tighter standards for valuation and transparency, and changes in the role and use of credit ratings. Further policy recommendations include strengthening the authorities’ responsiveness to risk and improving coordination, as well as enhancing the arrangements for central banking operations in crisis situations. As you have noticed, the responses have been swift, both at the EU and global level, and are highly consistent with each other. This reflects the strong common understanding among the authorities on the key issues that need to be addressed over the coming months. The ECB is strongly supportive of these initiatives and will contribute to the pertinent work. I firmly believe that the international cooperation between the authorities will continue to foster financial integration, development and stability.Let me finally reflect on financial integration in Europe, a challenge currently faced by both the private sector and the authorities. History has shown that the tendency towards national retrenchment may occur in times of uncertainty. I would like to use this occasion to stress the importance of continued financial integration in Europe. Besides improving efficiency, financial integration will make a marked contribution to stability in the long term. Integrated markets reinforce the shock-absorption capacity of the system, as they are more liquid and offer better opportunities for risk diversification. The Eurosystem is strongly committed to fostering financial integration. As an example, I would like to mention three key projects in the area of market infrastructures that have progressed significantly over recent months. First, the European payments landscape reached an important milestone last November, when TARGET2, the Eurosystem’s single shared platform for payments, was successfully launched. Another of the Eurosystem’s projects, TARGET2-Securities, aims at concentrating securities and cash settlement in Europe on an efficient, single platform. The private sector has contributed considerably to the planning and design of these systems. For example, last year, around 300 professionals from over 90 institutions played a large role in the formulation of the user requirements for TARGET2-Securities. Finally, the Single Euro Payments Area, or SEPA, is of utmost importance to the integration of retail banking markets in particular. The project aims to make non-cash euro payments as easy, efficient and safe as they are today in a single country. This project is being led by the European Payments Council, the decision-making and coordination body of the European banking industry in relation to payments, and has been supported by the Eurosystem and the European Commission in a variety of ways. The official launch of SEPA in January this year introduced both credit transfers and a card framework. The SEPA direct debit will follow before the end of 2009.Let me briefly conclude. The ongoing significant market correction should trigger reflections on the functioning of the global financial markets. I support the global efforts to draw all the lessons from recent and more distant history in order to make practicable policy recommendations to the private sector and the authorities alike. At this point, I would like to once again stress the importance of the effective coordination of all initiatives in order to ensure consistency. From the ECB’s point of view, it is important to foster a financial system that is stable and able to create sustainable value for all stakeholders. In this respect, prime responsibility lies with financial institutions themselves, but the public framework also has a role to play in providing them with the right structure of incentives. The latter objective does not imply dramatic changes, but some adaptations to the public framework in terms of capital requirements and liquidity risk management are certainly needed. Finally, financial integration in Europe will contribute to stability in the long term and therefore must not lose its momentum. Let’s all face the challenges that lie ahead of us. Thank you for your attention.[1] See the White Paper on the Integration of EU Mortgage Credit Markets, COM(2007) 807, 18 December 2007.[2] Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience, published on 12 April 2008. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",dinner speech fulfil two criteria spoil mood guest long given talk financi sector develop difficult task tri best delight abl share thought tonight would like thank organis invit intern chamber commerc long histori establish intern standard much welcom set standard motor financi integr effici bank sound manag practic howev light ongo financi market turmoil rigor think bank risk take risk mitig could agenda year come speech tonight talk euro area ecb perspect first elabor econom outlook euro area second explain clear distinct ecb well mani central bank make decis level key interest rate provis liquid bank take longerterm perspect clear privat sector author worldwid undergo fundament chang mode oper third therefor give view challeng face privat sector describ followup respons intern institut author close word import continu progress further financi integr europ financi turmoil affect global economi far howev effect euro area economi appear limit fundament euro area economi sound latest inform econom activ confirm pictur moder ongo growth look ahead domest foreign demand expect support real gdp growth although growth world economi moder expect remain resili benefit particular strong growth emerg market economi euro area capac utilis high profit sustain far signific sign suppli constraint bank loan addit employ labour forc particip increas signific unemploy rate fallen level seen year nonetheless outlook econom growth remain subject unusu high degre uncertainti well downsid risk relat main potenti broader impact financi market develop activ current foreseen addit increas commod price inflat side pictur less posit hicp inflat current stand level signific inflationari pressur stem main increas oil food commod price look ahead annual hicp inflat rate like remain signific come month moder gradual cours risk mediumterm inflat outlook remain clear upsid due main possibl rise oil agricultur price wage growth firm price power stronger current expect ecb monetari analysi confirm assess upsid risk price stabil medium longer term prevail money credit growth vigor euro area april decid leav key ecb interest rate unchang convinc current monetari polici stanc contribut achiev price stabil object remain strong commit prevent secondround effect materialis upsid risk price stabil medium term ecb made period financi turbul clear distinct decis level key ecb interest rate provis liquid aim ensur order function money market therefor start turmoil august ecb counter tension money market chang time liquid provis within mainten period increas averag matur addit longerterm refinanc oper ecb measur add overal stock liquid left averag suppli liquid unchang full reserv maintain period overal thank flexibl design eurosystem oper framework thus far prove resili effect current circumst ecb succeed steer overnight rate close key polici rate set govern council let move key challeng financi institut market general come month would like start stress firm belief mani weak highlight recent event address marketl initi selfregul nonetheless seem regulatori measur need first challeng improv market transpar market correct demonstr import disclosur valuat risk particular better disclosur risk well account risk manag practic essenc short term medium term financi institut identifi key risk disclos inform relev major stakehold second challeng relat valuat complex structur credit product task prove difficult past month current techniqu typic base market price make vulner chang investor sentiment mitig problem market enhanc valuat process particular find way improv qualiti input valuat model even event market data avail credibl valuat techniqu fundament maintain trust among counterparti third challeng bank address vulner liquid manag practic bank reli increas wholesal fund render vulner sudden disrupt market recent experi spur committe intern eu level carri import work liquid risk howev note marketl initi also way exampl led institut intern financ fourth final challeng mention today institut live social respons issu also highlight european commiss explor way promot respons lend mortgag credit market social respons behaviour key creat sustain valu stakehold global competit financi market today pressur shortterm result may negat effect incent particular relev market characteris inform asymmetri build preserv valu trust unattain ideal one concret translat busi object practic undertak requir among thing effect corpor govern arrang support strong corpor cultur let say word regulatori supervisori followup taken place far global natur market turbul requir enhanc crossbord consist financi regul supervis consequ identif key issu measur taken come month base cooper common understand eu global level let start address initi europ move initi alreadi way also posit impact term address challeng provid respons recent event financi market first strand initi relat enhanc framework financi supervis first full review function lamfalussi process conduct ecofin council decemb reveal general consensus among eu bodi need enhanc function lamfalussi approach context number possibl improv agre recent includ give european mandat nation supervisor requir nation supervisor take account european dimens work toward unit implement eu regul strengthen function various committe supervisor reinforc supervis crossbord financi group regard latter enhanc role supervisori colleg set committe european bank supervisor major eu bank import develop pursuit supervisori converg well mean strengthen cooper improv exchang inform second april eu central bank supervisor financ ministri adopt memorandum understand crossbord cooper financi crisi situat supervisori author central bank financ ministri come back initi specif address recent develop european financ minist agre road map polici respons financi turmoil four main object improv transpar investor market regul ii improv valuat standard iii reinforc prudenti framework includ liquid risk manag iv improv function market includ role credit rate agenc parallel work eu level initi taken global polici fora context would like draw attent work carri financi stabil forum prepar final report strengthen resili market institut meet g financ minist last week particular report call strengthen basel ii capit requir particular structur credit product securitis activ enhanc liquid risk manag effect prudenti oversight relev risk tighter standard valuat transpar chang role use credit rate polici recommend includ strengthen author respons risk improv coordin well enhanc arrang central bank oper crisi situat notic respons swift eu global level high consist reflect strong common understand among author key issu need address come month ecb strong support initi contribut pertin work firm believ intern cooper author continu foster financi integr develop stabil let final reflect financi integr europ challeng current face privat sector author histori shown tendenc toward nation retrench may occur time uncertainti would like use occas stress import continu financi integr europ besid improv effici financi integr make mark contribut stabil long term integr market reinforc shockabsorpt capac system liquid offer better opportun risk diversif eurosystem strong commit foster financi integr exampl would like mention three key project area market infrastructur progress signific recent month first european payment landscap reach import mileston last novemb target eurosystem singl share platform payment success launch anoth eurosystem project target secur aim concentr secur cash settlement europ effici singl platform privat sector contribut consider plan design system exampl last year around profession institut play larg role formul user requir target secur final singl euro payment area sepa utmost import integr retail bank market particular project aim make noncash euro payment easi effici safe today singl countri project led european payment council decisionmak coordin bodi european bank industri relat payment support eurosystem european commiss varieti way offici launch sepa januari year introduc credit transfer card framework sepa direct debit follow end let briefli conclud ongo signific market correct trigger reflect function global financi market support global effort draw lesson recent distant histori order make practic polici recommend privat sector author alik point would like stress import effect coordin initi order ensur consist ecb point view import foster financi system stabl abl creat sustain valu stakehold respect prime respons lie financi institut public framework also role play provid right structur incent latter object impli dramat chang adapt public framework term capit requir liquid risk manag certain need final financi integr europ contribut stabil long term therefor must lose momentum let face challeng lie ahead us thank attent see white paper integr eu mortgag credit market com decemb report financi stabil forum enhanc market institut resili publish april reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en