Jürgen Stark: Economic adjustment in a monetary union,12-10-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,2974,"<p>Exactly three years ago, in October 2008, the global financial crisis started to hit the Latvian economy. A strong policy reaction was unavoidable to stabilise the situation and correct past excesses. Latvia embarked on a remarkable economic adjustment process, laying the foundations of a renewed upturn. Although there is still a long way to go, strong policies, supported by international financial assistance, have resulted in a significant reduction of Latvia’s macroeconomic imbalances.Right now, some euro area countries are facing similar challenges to those facing Latvia during the past three years. Although the magnitudes and some other features may differ, the broad characteristics are the same. In both cases, there is a need for adjustment as a result of macroeconomic imbalances, losses in competitiveness and unsustainable economic policies. For both Latvia and euro area countries, the challenge is to implement an economic adjustment without using the nominal exchange rate as an instrument. In Latvia, the authorities chose not to use that option, whereas in the euro area that option is no longer available. Adjusting without the nominal exchange rate is the topic of my speech today. The loss of the exchange rate as a policy instrument has important implications for economic policies, especially in a world where countries are faced with economic shocks that require adjustment. After discussing some conceptual issues, I will draw some lessons from the crisis for the euro area. Those lessons very clearly highlight that, in order to reap the benefits of a common currency, participating countries need to satisfy certain economic conditions. Finally, I will also reflect on Latvia’s experience. How do countries in a monetary union adjust to asymmetric macroeconomic shocks? In the absence of nominal exchange rate flexibility vis-à-vis the other countries participating in a monetary union, adjustment has to occur via other channels. Many years ago, Mundell argued that if a group of countries wanted to adopt a common currency, the shocks that they were exposed to had better be similar. If that were not the case, they would need to have strong alternative adjustment mechanisms. [1] Mundell and others identified key conditions for such alternative adjustment mechanisms: price flexibility, factor mobility and fiscal transfers. Price flexibility is important in order to let countries affected by adverse economic shocks recover by adjusting wages and reducing relative prices in order to rebuild competitiveness. The second adjustment mechanism, cross-border factor mobility, or in particular labour mobility, helps to adjust to adverse shocks as people move out of the depressed economy until it regains competitiveness and the labour market in the country finds a new equilibrium. A third adjustment mechanism identified in the literature is fiscal transfers, flowing from the stronger countries or regions to the weaker parts of the monetary union. Although these adjustment mechanisms are often referred to as being substitutes, they are in fact not. While the first two are important to solve the problem facing a country affected by an adverse shock, the third, fiscal transfers, only hides the problem. Temporary transfers can play a stabilising role and may be needed – subject to strict conditionality – if a country is affected by a very serious adverse shock. Open-ended transfers, however, are not a mode of adjustment. In fact, they are the opposite. They finance non-adjustment.Therefore, the key adjustment mechanism in a monetary union is price and wage flexibility, assuming that cross-border labour mobility is limited. Wages and prices are essential for country adjustments, as they directly impact on the real exchange rate, and thus on a country’s competitiveness. In fact, wages and prices are, by definition, the only remaining component of the real exchange rate that can be adjusted in the absence of nominal exchange rate flexibility. It is also important in this regard to distinguish between temporary and permanent adverse shocks. Options that are attractive in the face of temporary shocks may be less so if the shock is permanent or highly persistent and vice versa. In the case of a permanent adverse shock, the country in question faces an adjustment to a permanently lower standard of living. Economic flexibility can be promoted by removing the institutional barriers to flexible wage and price-setting mechanisms. If wages and prices are flexible enough and able to adjust to changes in economic conditions, then this will not only speed up the adjustment, but it will also help to avoid unwelcome fluctuations in output and unemployment. In a monetary union, most of the adjustment has to take place through national labour markets. Therefore, wage setting should appropriately reflect the different situations of sectors, of firms and of overall labour market conditions.Let me move from conceptual issues to the actual situation in the euro area. What are the causes of imbalances in EMU that need to be adjusted now? What are the implications of these developments for the functioning of the monetary union? What lessons can we draw from this experience for economic adjustment in EMU?The key point I want to make here is that macroeconomic imbalances and unsustainable fiscal policies are the root cause of the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area. The existing economic governance framework has not been able to prevent the emergence of excessive macroeconomic imbalances. Moreover, fiscal policy coordination in the euro area turned out to be completely insufficient.Before I discuss what needs to be done to improve EMU’s institutional framework, let me first say something on the causes of the macroeconomic imbalances in euro area countries. Some countries have built up significant internal and external economic imbalances during the past decade, and recorded inflation rates persistently above the euro area average (see Slide 2, HICP inflation). The ECB repeatedly warned against emerging imbalances. Increases in labour compensation in some countries, driven in most cases by high public sector wage increases, exceeded productivity gains by a significant margin, leading to increases in unit labour costs in excess of the euro area average and a gradual erosion of competitiveness (see Slide 3, ULC indices). At the same time, growth in the unregulated financial sector and unsustainably strong domestic demand growth, coupled in some cases with excessive credit growth and large and sustained increases in real estate prices, resulted in large current account deficits (see Slide 4, CA deficits) and high levels of public and private debt (see Slide 5, public debt ratios). Many factors contributed to these developments, including unrealistically optimistic expectations about future income developments and the underestimation of credit risks by financial institutions. A key factor was that wage and income policies were not sufficiently geared towards preserving competitiveness in a monetary union. Governments failed to address structural rigidities in the euro area economies – relating to, among other things, wage-setting institutions, including wage indexation, and to labour and product market regulation. An institutional framework focusing on the early identification and correction of macroeconomic imbalances would have helped to prevent these problems. But the ongoing crisis is also a symptom of policy failures and deficiencies in the existing institutional framework governing economic policies in EMU. The Broad Economic Policy Guidelines, the central link in coordination of the Member States’ economic policies, did not work. The instruments and procedures were available. But they were either not implemented or ignored, or they were watered down. Peer pressure among the Member States – potentially a strong tool of mutual fiscal surveillance – fell short of what was needed as countries did not attach sufficient importance to their joint responsibility for the stability of the euro area. Several proposals have been made on how to overcome the flaws in the EMU governance framework and I will only say a few words on the changes we need here. [2] Addressing EMU’s difficulties requires a major strengthening of the rules and organisations that govern fiscal and other economic policies. The identification of the necessary reforms has to begin with the ultimate objective: institutional arrangements that provide credible incentives for sound policies. Euro area countries and countries preparing for euro adoption should be aware that this requires the transfer of sovereignty to a central institution with much stronger powers. It also requires stricter rules on the preparation and implementation of budgets at the national level.The recent agreement reached by the European Parliament and the Council on the economic governance package is a step in the right direction. But it falls short of the “quantum leap” in economic governance that the ECB has long advocated for the euro area. [3] I particularly regret that one of the key aspects of such a quantum leap – greater automaticity in decision-making through the use of reverse qualified majority voting to the maximum extent possible – has only partly been achieved. I therefore believe that, in the medium term, the review clause included in the package should be used to enable further enhancements to euro area economic governance that will contribute to a smoother functioning of EMU.The experience of the crisis has shown that participation in a monetary union places important demands on national economic policies. What economic conditions need to be satisfied for a country to fully reap the benefits from adopting the euro? I believe that the fundamental logic of the Treaty, and the convergence framework embedded in the Treaty, remains correct: countries have to make sure that they pursue sound macroeconomic policies. They should first and foremost focus on establishing sound fiscal and sustainable macroeconomic developments in their own country and complement this with the necessary structural reforms. By doing so, they will actually kill two birds with one stone, as they then also follow the best possible strategy for ensuring smooth integration into the euro area in a lasting manner.Reaping the benefits of the euro is thus in the hands of the national authorities themselves. Not only can they improve market flexibility, but they can also conduct a well-designed fiscal policy. As I have stressed on many occasions, the best contribution fiscal policy can make to the proper functioning of the euro area is by being sustainable and medium-term oriented. Moreover fiscal policy can and should also help mitigate undesirable trend growth differentials through “high quality” expenditure and tax policies. In particular, high and inefficient public expenditure can put a brake on economic activity by imposing a high tax burden on the economy and channelling resources into unproductive uses.Let me stress that governments and social partners share responsibility for ensuring that wage determination sufficiently takes into account labour market conditions and does not jeopardise competitiveness and employment. Governments should also be aware that wage setting in the public sector can serve as a role model for the private sector. And social partners need to take into account the different conditions at the firm and sectoral level, internalising the repercussions of wage settlements on competitiveness and thus employment at their company and in their industry, sector or region. Sufficient wage differentiation would improve employment opportunities for less skilled workers and in regions or sectors with high unemployment. In this respect, excessive regulations – both in labour and product markets – undermine job creation, in particular for young and less qualified workers, as well as for all those who face problems entering the labour market.Let me turn from the euro area to Latvia. Following years of excessive demand growth and serious overheating, Latvia recorded severe losses in output, particularly in 2009 (see Slide 6, GDP levels). This contraction was triggered by a major adverse shock, the global financial crisis, but would have occurred sooner or later anyway, as the macroeconomic imbalances that had been built up were unsustainable. The crisis that started in 2008 marked the beginning of a painful but remarkable adjustment process. Thanks to strong domestic policies combined with international support, this adjustment has laid the foundations for an economic recovery, underpinned by healthier balance sheets and improvements in competitiveness.I believe that Latvia’s experience harbours important lessons for countries inside the euro area that have to undergo a similar adjustment. The adjustment process in Latvia during the past few years shows that it is possible to reduce large macroeconomic imbalances without adjusting the nominal exchange rate. Such an adjustment benefits from a high degree of flexibility of the economy and needs to rely on a determined and strong policy response to rebalance the economy, regain competitiveness and lay the foundations for sustainable output growth. A sizeable fiscal adjustment was essential for strengthening fiscal sustainability and critical in regaining market confidence. Cuts in wage costs and prices were necessary to regain competitiveness that had been lost during the boom years. Exactly three years after the crisis hit, Latvia now seems close to concluding its international financial assistance programme.What were the specific elements that underpinned this adjustment? I want to mention four elements in this regard. First, in the absence of nominal exchange rate flexibility, any real exchange rate adjustment had to be delivered via cuts in wage costs and prices combined with enhancements in labour productivity. The adjustment in wages was both market-driven, owing to a sharp decline in the demand for labour, and supported by policies aimed at cutting public sector wage costs. The labour market adjustment was not only achieved through wage cuts, but also through employment cuts, reductions in hours worked and a restructuring of production processes. As a result, unit labour costs declined significantly, partly offsetting their previous excessive gains (see Slide 7, ULC levels). Second, sizeable fiscal consolidation was targeted at bringing Latvia’s fiscal position back to a sustainable path, lowering sovereign funding needs and regaining market confidence. Efforts also focused on strengthening the budgetary framework and procedures. Following a sharp increase in fiscal deficits, Latvia’s fiscal position has started to improve, but the deficit remains at a very high level (see Slide 8, fiscal balances). A third element of the adjustment strategy comprised structural reforms to enhance market flexibility and medium-term growth. Measures focused on both labour and product markets, such as revisions to labour market legislation to strengthen labour market flexibility, improving the business climate by streamlining start-up procedures and tax administration, supporting exporting firms and combating the informal economy. Although clear progress has been made, I believe that the structural reform agenda remains unfinished.Fourth and finally, the adjustment strategy comprised measures to strengthen financial stability and reduce private sector debt burdens. The authorities initially focused on securing liquidity in banks. Subsequently, adequate capitalisation became increasingly important, given the deterioration in the quality of banks’ loan portfolios in the wake of the economic downturn. As a result, financial stability was maintained, although more time is still needed to repair private sector balance sheets.Despite Latvia’s adjustment so far, ensuring the continued success of the strategy will demand resolute implementation of further reforms on several fronts. Key challenges remain to ensure fiscal sustainability, strengthen the economic structure and improve the ability for the economy to grow without generating inflationary pressures. Latvia still has a low GDP per capita relative to many other EU countries (see Slide 9, GDP per capita), implying that it has an important potential to catch up vis-à-vis the rest of the EU. This catching-up process is likely to have a bearing on inflation in the medium term. Given the tightly pegged exchange rate and the limitations of alternative counter-cyclical policy instruments, it may be difficult to prevent macroeconomic imbalances from building up again. Moreover, the severe economic downturn in Latvia has left its legacies in the form of a destruction of supply capacity and a very large decline in employment (see Slide 10, employment). It is essential for Latvia to strengthen the fundamental drivers of sustainable and balanced growth by enhancing the quality and quantity of labour supply and improving the quality of the business environment, which is hampered by, among other things, a large informal economy. As regards euro adoption, the challenges that some euro area countries are currently facing illustrates very clearly the importance of sustainable convergence. Very careful preparation is required to make sure that convergence continues after euro adoption. Measures to reduce inflation temporarily or easily-reversible measures to lower the fiscal deficit do not represent sustainable convergence. The decision to adopt the euro is a very fundamental one and should not be taken lightly. Let me conclude. Economic shocks are a fact of life and countries should be prepared to deal with them. This is all the more the case in a monetary union, where the nominal exchange rate is no longer available as an instrument of adjustment. The challenges that some euro area countries currently face underline the critical importance of strong adjustment mechanisms and the need to avoid macroeconomic imbalances and unsustainable fiscal policies. This all underlines the responsibility of national economic policy-makers. Stability begins at home. Strong economic adjustment mechanisms not only help to absorb adverse shocks, but they are also essential to reap the benefits of the euro. The Latvian experience shows that adjusting to major adverse shocks and reducing large macroeconomic imbalances is not impossible. Using a combination of fiscal and nominal wage adjustment, structural reforms and measures to preserve financial stability, as well as international support, Latvia has been able to lay the foundations for its economy to stabilise and recover, although important challenges remain and the policy agenda remains unfinished. What matters is a broad political consensus, and a broad consensus in society, about the need for adjustment and the correction of past behaviour. I wish Latvia all the best in its efforts in this regard. Thank you for your attention.[1]Mundell, R. (1961), “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas”, American Economic Review, 51, pp. 657-665.[2]For more details on fiscal reform proposals, see, for example, Schuknecht, L., Moutot, P., Rother, P. and Stark, J. (2011), “The Stability and Growth Pact - crisis and reform”, Occasional Paper Series, No 129, European Central Bank, September.[3]See European Central Bank, Reinforcing economic governance in the euro area, 10 June 2010.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",exact three year ago octob global financi crisi start hit latvian economi strong polici reaction unavoid stabilis situat correct past excess latvia embark remark econom adjust process lay foundat renew upturn although still long way go strong polici support intern financi assist result signific reduct latvia macroeconom imbal right euro area countri face similar challeng face latvia past three year although magnitud featur may differ broad characterist case need adjust result macroeconom imbal loss competit unsustain econom polici latvia euro area countri challeng implement econom adjust without use nomin exchang rate instrument latvia author chose use option wherea euro area option longer avail adjust without nomin exchang rate topic speech today loss exchang rate polici instrument import implic econom polici especi world countri face econom shock requir adjust discuss conceptu issu draw lesson crisi euro area lesson clear highlight order reap benefit common currenc particip countri need satisfi certain econom condit final also reflect latvia experi countri monetari union adjust asymmetr macroeconom shock absenc nomin exchang rate flexibl visàvi countri particip monetari union adjust occur via channel mani year ago mundel argu group countri want adopt common currenc shock expos better similar case would need strong altern adjust mechan mundel other identifi key condit altern adjust mechan price flexibl factor mobil fiscal transfer price flexibl import order let countri affect advers econom shock recov adjust wage reduc relat price order rebuild competit second adjust mechan crossbord factor mobil particular labour mobil help adjust advers shock peopl move depress economi regain competit labour market countri find new equilibrium third adjust mechan identifi literatur fiscal transfer flow stronger countri region weaker part monetari union although adjust mechan often refer substitut fact first two import solv problem face countri affect advers shock third fiscal transfer hide problem temporari transfer play stabilis role may need subject strict condit countri affect serious advers shock openend transfer howev mode adjust fact opposit financ nonadjust therefor key adjust mechan monetari union price wage flexibl assum crossbord labour mobil limit wage price essenti countri adjust direct impact real exchang rate thus countri competit fact wage price definit remain compon real exchang rate adjust absenc nomin exchang rate flexibl also import regard distinguish temporari perman advers shock option attract face temporari shock may less shock perman high persist vice versa case perman advers shock countri question face adjust perman lower standard live econom flexibl promot remov institut barrier flexibl wage priceset mechan wage price flexibl enough abl adjust chang econom condit speed adjust also help avoid unwelcom fluctuat output unemploy monetari union adjust take place nation labour market therefor wage set appropri reflect differ situat sector firm overal labour market condit let move conceptu issu actual situat euro area caus imbal emu need adjust implic develop function monetari union lesson draw experi econom adjust emu key point want make macroeconom imbal unsustain fiscal polici root caus sovereign debt crisi euro area exist econom govern framework abl prevent emerg excess macroeconom imbal moreov fiscal polici coordin euro area turn complet insuffici discuss need done improv emu institut framework let first say someth caus macroeconom imbal euro area countri countri built signific intern extern econom imbal past decad record inflat rate persist euro area averag see slide hicp inflat ecb repeat warn emerg imbal increas labour compens countri driven case high public sector wage increas exceed product gain signific margin lead increas unit labour cost excess euro area averag gradual eros competit see slide ulc indic time growth unregul financi sector unsustain strong domest demand growth coupl case excess credit growth larg sustain increas real estat price result larg current account deficit see slide ca deficit high level public privat debt see slide public debt ratio mani factor contribut develop includ unrealist optimist expect futur incom develop underestim credit risk financi institut key factor wage incom polici suffici gear toward preserv competit monetari union govern fail address structur rigid euro area economi relat among thing wageset institut includ wage index labour product market regul institut framework focus earli identif correct macroeconom imbal would help prevent problem ongo crisi also symptom polici failur defici exist institut framework govern econom polici emu broad econom polici guidelin central link coordin member state econom polici work instrument procedur avail either implement ignor water peer pressur among member state potenti strong tool mutual fiscal surveil fell short need countri attach suffici import joint respons stabil euro area sever propos made overcom flaw emu govern framework say word chang need address emu difficulti requir major strengthen rule organis govern fiscal econom polici identif necessari reform begin ultim object institut arrang provid credibl incent sound polici euro area countri countri prepar euro adopt awar requir transfer sovereignti central institut much stronger power also requir stricter rule prepar implement budget nation level recent agreement reach european parliament council econom govern packag step right direct fall short quantum leap econom govern ecb long advoc euro area particular regret one key aspect quantum leap greater automat decisionmak use revers qualifi major vote maximum extent possibl part achiev therefor believ medium term review claus includ packag use enabl enhanc euro area econom govern contribut smoother function emu experi crisi shown particip monetari union place import demand nation econom polici econom condit need satisfi countri fulli reap benefit adopt euro believ fundament logic treati converg framework embed treati remain correct countri make sure pursu sound macroeconom polici first foremost focus establish sound fiscal sustain macroeconom develop countri complement necessari structur reform actual kill two bird one stone also follow best possibl strategi ensur smooth integr euro area last manner reap benefit euro thus hand nation author improv market flexibl also conduct welldesign fiscal polici stress mani occas best contribut fiscal polici make proper function euro area sustain mediumterm orient moreov fiscal polici also help mitig undesir trend growth differenti high qualiti expenditur tax polici particular high ineffici public expenditur put brake econom activ impos high tax burden economi channel resourc unproduct use let stress govern social partner share respons ensur wage determin suffici take account labour market condit jeopardis competit employ govern also awar wage set public sector serv role model privat sector social partner need take account differ condit firm sector level internalis repercuss wage settlement competit thus employ compani industri sector region suffici wage differenti would improv employ opportun less skill worker region sector high unemploy respect excess regul labour product market undermin job creation particular young less qualifi worker well face problem enter labour market let turn euro area latvia follow year excess demand growth serious overh latvia record sever loss output particular see slide gdp level contract trigger major advers shock global financi crisi would occur sooner later anyway macroeconom imbal built unsustain crisi start mark begin pain remark adjust process thank strong domest polici combin intern support adjust laid foundat econom recoveri underpin healthier balanc sheet improv competit believ latvia experi harbour import lesson countri insid euro area undergo similar adjust adjust process latvia past year show possibl reduc larg macroeconom imbal without adjust nomin exchang rate adjust benefit high degre flexibl economi need reli determin strong polici respons rebal economi regain competit lay foundat sustain output growth sizeabl fiscal adjust essenti strengthen fiscal sustain critic regain market confid cut wage cost price necessari regain competit lost boom year exact three year crisi hit latvia seem close conclud intern financi assist programm specif element underpin adjust want mention four element regard first absenc nomin exchang rate flexibl real exchang rate adjust deliv via cut wage cost price combin enhanc labour product adjust wage marketdriven owe sharp declin demand labour support polici aim cut public sector wage cost labour market adjust achiev wage cut also employ cut reduct hour work restructur product process result unit labour cost declin signific part offset previous excess gain see slide ulc level second sizeabl fiscal consolid target bring latvia fiscal posit back sustain path lower sovereign fund need regain market confid effort also focus strengthen budgetari framework procedur follow sharp increas fiscal deficit latvia fiscal posit start improv deficit remain high level see slide fiscal balanc third element adjust strategi compris structur reform enhanc market flexibl mediumterm growth measur focus labour product market revis labour market legisl strengthen labour market flexibl improv busi climat streamlin startup procedur tax administr support export firm combat inform economi although clear progress made believ structur reform agenda remain unfinish fourth final adjust strategi compris measur strengthen financi stabil reduc privat sector debt burden author initi focus secur liquid bank subsequ adequ capitalis becam increas import given deterior qualiti bank loan portfolio wake econom downturn result financi stabil maintain although time still need repair privat sector balanc sheet despit latvia adjust far ensur continu success strategi demand resolut implement reform sever front key challeng remain ensur fiscal sustain strengthen econom structur improv abil economi grow without generat inflationari pressur latvia still low gdp per capita relat mani eu countri see slide gdp per capita impli import potenti catch visàvi rest eu catchingup process like bear inflat medium term given tight peg exchang rate limit altern countercycl polici instrument may difficult prevent macroeconom imbal build moreov sever econom downturn latvia left legaci form destruct suppli capac larg declin employ see slide employ essenti latvia strengthen fundament driver sustain balanc growth enhanc qualiti quantiti labour suppli improv qualiti busi environ hamper among thing larg inform economi regard euro adopt challeng euro area countri current face illustr clear import sustain converg care prepar requir make sure converg continu euro adopt measur reduc inflat temporarili easilyrevers measur lower fiscal deficit repres sustain converg decis adopt euro fundament one taken light let conclud econom shock fact life countri prepar deal case monetari union nomin exchang rate longer avail instrument adjust challeng euro area countri current face underlin critic import strong adjust mechan need avoid macroeconom imbal unsustain fiscal polici underlin respons nation econom policymak stabil begin home strong econom adjust mechan help absorb advers shock also essenti reap benefit euro latvian experi show adjust major advers shock reduc larg macroeconom imbal imposs use combin fiscal nomin wage adjust structur reform measur preserv financi stabil well intern support latvia abl lay foundat economi stabilis recov although import challeng remain polici agenda remain unfinish matter broad polit consensus broad consensus societi need adjust correct past behaviour wish latvia best effort regard thank attent mundel r theori optimum currenc area american econom review pp detail fiscal reform propos see exampl schuknecht l moutot p rother p stark j stabil growth pact crisi reform occasion paper seri european central bank septemb see european central bank reinforc econom govern euro area june reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en