Vítor Constâncio: Recent challenges to monetary policy in the euro area,19-06-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,3811,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,Seven years have passed since the financial market turmoil in the summer of 2007 marked the beginning of the financial crisis and the ensuing recession. These years have been challenging for all central banks. They have marked the end of a long period of remarkably stable, good macroeconomic performance. The widespread adoption of an explicit price stability objective had been conducive to low inflation outcome in an environment of prolonged economic growth. Existing monetary policy strategies—mostly variants of the inflation targeting model, though with notable exceptions at the ECB and at the Federal Reserve—appeared to be adequate and sufficient to attain this goal. Consistently with the Tinbergen principle, the primary objective of price stability was achieved everywhere through a single, conventional monetary policy instrument: a short-term interest rate.The global financial crisis changed this situation abruptly. Since then, some central banks have been endowed with additional macro-prudential instruments and a more explicit mandate to preserve financial stability. While no explicit change in monetary policy strategies has taken place, it is fair to say that there has been a generalised increase in the attention paid to banks’ balance sheet conditions and to the evolution of credit. By far the most visible innovation since the beginning of the Great Recession however, has been the increase in the array of instruments used for monetary policy purposes, particularly forward guidance about interest rates and most notably the use of central banks’ balance sheets through Large Scale Assets Purchases (LSAP, i.e. Quantitative Easing or QE). In theoretical debates, other proposals were made namely, to change the targets of monetary policy to price level targeting or to nominal GDP or simply, to increase the established objective of 2% in inflation targeting regimes to 3% or 4%. For practical reasons, these proposals were not retained and forward guidance and QE were the new instruments of choice for many central banks. Before the crisis, the established instrument of monetary policy was a short-term interest rate steered either by traditional open-market operations of buying and selling securities or through temporary lending to banks via repos, like in the ECB’s case. After the crisis, all major central banks significantly increased their balance sheets and the respective monetary base. Chart 1It would, nevertheless, be misleading to compare the changes in balance sheet size as if they were originated by the same policies and, consequently, had the same impact. The case of the ECB is different from the other central banks as the expansion of the balance sheet happened as the result of lending to the banks through repos of different maturity. The increase in the balance sheet was dependent on the demand of primary liquidity by the banks, facilitated however, by the provision of liquidity through a regime of fixed rate full allotment of banks’ demand, introduced in September 2008. The impact on overall monetary conditions was, as before the crisis, dependent on the behaviour of the banks to pass-through the higher monetary base into credit and broad money, which did not happen. What did happen was a justified fulfilment of the role of lender of last resort but not a new type of monetary policy instrument in the sense of aiming at a new transmission channel. The adoption of a fixed-rate full allotment regime of liquidity provision, which has been in place since and was recently extended until December 2016 (at the very least) was indeed an extraordinary unconventional measure. It supported the banking sector and avoided a more detrimental credit crunch. However, the size of our monetary base declined significantly during 2013 when banks decided to start the repayment of their previous high borrowings. On the other hand, as per the following table, total outright purchases of assets by the ECB under two different programmes was not behind the increase of the balance sheet as they represent a relatively small proportion of total assets compared with other central banks.Table 1Before the crisis, both methods of conducting liquidity management transactions (via outright purchases or lending to the banks) previously mentioned, had the objective of steering a short-term interest rate close to the policy rate decided by the central bank. It would therefore be misleading to interpret the increase of banks’ balance sheets through LSAP or QE as just an increase in scale of the traditional outright purchases. There is a different objective of intervening directly in different asset markets and in higher maturities in order to influence the respective prices or yields. The intention and the composition of the assets purchased are thus relevant and different from what was previously done to manage short-term rates. QE has several transmission channels: besides the direct impact on prices/yields of the purchased assets (Treasuries or ABSs), it triggers portfolio adjustments on other assets, like equities or exchange rates, and is accompanied by wealth effects. While the theoretical debate on the exact channels of transmission remains active, many event and time-series studies have tried to measure the QE effects. John Williams (2013) presents a survey of several studies and reports that USD 600 billion of FED asset purchases achieves a result equivalent to a cut in the federal funds rate of 0.75 to 1 percentage point. [1] The concerns expressed by various economists and the media that the extraordinary increases in the monetary base in many countries would lead to significant inflation rates, never materialised. As the following slide illustrates, there was no transmission in the prevailing economic situation by the banks, to credit or broad money aggregates. Inflation did not respond, putting in doubt the quantitative vision about its origin. When asked about what Japan should do to overcome deflation, Milton Friedman answered in 2000: “It is very simple. They can buy long-term government securities and they can keep buying them and providing high-powered money until the high-powered money starts getting the economy into an expansion”. [2] The more recent Japanese experience is still open to analysis but the channels envisioned by Milton Friedman have seemingly not been operating in the other advanced economies. As mentioned, the transmission channels at play in the recent QE experiences are indeed different from the traditional quantitative view.Chart 2As the financial crisis led to the Great Recession and then evolved into the European sovereign debt crisis, the ECB started providing liquidity in fixed-rate full allotment mode, progressively and considerably extended the maturity of its loans to commercial banks, widened the set of eligible collateral, made medium-scale purchases of financial assets and announced the Outright Monetary Transactions programme. As a result of these extraordinary measures, at the end of 2012 calm started returning in financial markets, leading to lower financial spreads and a reduction in volatility. The initial signs of economic recovery started appearing. Preliminary formal analyses indicate that non-standard measures were instrumental in supporting financial intermediation and economic activity in the euro area. [3]Despite these recent, encouraging developments on the financial side, real economy recovery has been weak and inflation outcomes have been surprisingly low. The new challenge we face in the euro area today is to avert the risk of a prolonged period of excessively low inflation. Euro area annual HICP inflation was 0.5% in May 2014, after averaging 0.7% in the first four months of the year. The June 2014 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections foresee a gradual increase in annual HICP inflation towards levels consistent with our definition of price stability. The pace of the increase is, however, slow. From 0.7% in 2014, inflation is expected to reach 1.1% in 2015 and, more uncertainly, 1.4% in 2016. All three figures have been revised downward in comparison with the March 2014 ECB staff macroeconomic projections and portray a situation distant from our objective of keeping inflation below but close to 2% in the medium-term.Inflation developments alone go a long way in motivating the combination of the measures announced by the Governing Council of the ECB on 5 June, to provide additional monetary policy accommodation and to support lending to the real economy. This package included further reductions in the key ECB interest rates, new longer-term refinancing operations targeted to stimulate credit creation, and preparatory work related to outright purchases of asset-backed securities. In addition, the ECB committed to an extension of the fixed-rate full allotment regime in tender procedures and decided to suspend the weekly fine-tuning operation sterilising the liquidity injected under the Securities Markets Programme. Over time these measures will contribute to a return of inflation to levels closer to 2% and safeguard the anchoring of medium to long-term inflation expectations. Nevertheless, with policy interest rates close to the effective lower bound and persistently timid growth prospects, there is a small, but non-insignificant risk that any additional adverse shock may open the door to a more protracted period of low inflation. Against this background, I would like to organise the rest of my remarks today around three issues. First, why do we find ourselves in the current, low inflation predicament? I sustain that inflation fluctuations have been somewhat surprising ever since the beginning of the Great Recession. In part, they were the result of adverse exogenous shocks. To some extent however, they were also connected with unwarranted variations in markets’ expectations of the future stance of monetary policy. Second, I will argue that the Governing Council meeting at the beginning of June is important not only for the decisions that were actually adopted. It is important also for the clear signal that we provided about the determination to do more in the future, in the event of additional downward pressures on inflation. I will develop these two points which deal with the way our recent policy decisions will produce effects. The third question is: how would the ECB react, should the risks of a protracted period of low inflation materialise? At this point in time, this is essentially a scenario analysis—and specifically an analysis of a low probability scenario. Outright purchases of a range of financial assets would be effective in this situation, but structural reforms would also be essential to spur economic growth.Euro area inflation developments over the past six years have been remarkably volatile. From the 4.1% peak of July 2008, HICP inflation fell markedly at the trough of the recession and reached negative levels in the short period between June and October 2009. However, in the second half of 2009, prices started increasing again, also due to a rise in energy prices. In spite of a persisting level of economic slack, the HICP inflation climbed rapidly and steadily up to a peak of 3% from September to November 2011. Similar developments could be observed in the U.S., where inflation remained stable after a decline in the first months of 2009 and gave rise to a debate on the “missing disinflation”. [4] If those developments were somewhat surprising for their swiftness, more recent inflation dynamics have displayed a remarkably high degree of persistence. As of 2012, euro area inflation started falling again, and has continued to do so to date. Since October 2013, the year-on-year rate of growth of the headline HICP has oscillated between 1% and 0.5%, in spite of the slowly consolidating economic recovery. A situation of low inflation is now common to many advanced economies, creating a moral general puzzle. All in all, the lack of a tight relationship between inflation developments and estimates of slack in economic activity, such as the output gap, is not surprising from the point of view of modern monetary theories. The new Keynesian Phillips curve suggests that, net of erratic factors, inflation is determined by the whole path of expected future output gaps, not just its current level. Hence, economic slack at any given point in time need not be associated with a deflationary episode, if it is accompanied by expectations that the output gap will eventually turn sufficiently positive. In turn, expectations of the future stance of monetary policy play a key role in determining expected future output gaps. The absence of persistent disinflation in 2009 may thus be ascribed to the monetary accommodation imparted by many central banks between the end of 2008 and 2009 through both standard and non-standard tools. The monetary policy easing was commensurate to the size of the shock, i.e. such as to roughly offset the disinflationary pressures produced by the recession. [5] The recent fall in inflation could equivalently be ascribed to unwarranted fears of a possible tightening of the monetary policy stance not too far into the future.Such fears could clearly be observed one year ago, when the Federal Reserve announced the tapering of its large-scale asset purchases. In spite of clear Fed communication on the disconnect between this decision and the timing of “lift-off” of policy interest rates, the tapering announcement quickly led to a rise in forward interest rates on both sides of the Atlantic. The ECB’s adoption of forward guidance in July 2013 was largely the result of these unwarranted developments. Recent studies confirm that our forward guidance was successful in reversing the previous increase in forward-rates and in clarifying the persistently accommodative intonation of the ECB policy stance. [6]The same market logic that led to the interpretation of the Fed’s tapering announcement as a signal of a forthcoming tightening of policy interest rates may also have been applied to interpret the implications of the reduction in the size of the ECB balance sheet that occurred over the past couple of years. From a total dimension equal to over 32.5% of GDP in June of 2012, our balance sheet has shrunk to 19% in May 2014, as a result of banks’ decision to exercise the early repayment option for outstanding 3-year LTROs. The contraction in the ECB balance sheet is particularly striking when compared to the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve, which continued expanding from 19% of GDP at the end of 2012 to 25.7 % in May 2014. These developments, which are accompanied by a similar evolution of the respective monetary bases, if jointly interpreted as signals of the relative evolution of future policy rates in the two monetary areas, may have contributed to sustain the appreciation in the exchange rate of the euro which, against the U.S. dollar, went from 1.21 in July 2012 to a peak above 1.39 in May 2014. The lagged impact of the marked euro appreciation played an important role in determining the recent, low inflation outcomes. Since mid-2012 the exchange rate appreciation is estimated to explain a decrease of 0.5 percentage points in our inflation rate. Together with falling energy and food prices, it explains the bulk of the imported downside pressure on euro area consumer prices.Of course, the euro appreciation may also have reflected other factors, for example changes in attitudes towards risk. Such factors can be expected to produce only temporary effects on inflation, and would therefore not normally require a monetary policy response. Unwarranted fluctuations in markets’ perceptions over the future stance of monetary policy, however, could be a more persistent source of low-inflation risk. In this case, a monetary policy reaction would be necessary to steer perceptions away from unlikely future outcomes.From this standpoint, I believe that there are three clear channels through which the decisions adopted by the Governing Council in June is effective.The first channel is standard and has to do with the expansionary impact of the measures on the real economy and inflation. To gauge the extent of such an impact, it is useful to refer again to the ECB macroeconomic projections and recall that they are conditioned on a number of technical assumptions. These assumptions relate to the evolution of macroeconomic and financial variables, which specifically include market expectations of short-term interest rates developments over the projection horizon. The conditioning assumptions for the June 2014 projections were computed based on information available on 14 May 2014. Over the past month, financial market prices have adjusted to reflect the ECB decisions in early June. As a result, expected short-term rates have fallen by 10 basis points at all horizons and the euro has depreciated since May by 2.5% to 1.354. If taken as new conditioning assumptions, these developments would move the whole path of the inflation projections upwards and ensure a faster return to price stability.The second channel through which the recent ECB decisions will be consequential is the credit channel, which is expected to be positively impacted by the new targeted LTRO facility and the extension of the ACC programme. [7]The third channel has to do with expectations. The announcement of the measures adopted at the beginning of June has been accompanied by a clear communication concerning the future path of policy.In his Press conference, President Draghi emphasised again that “key ECB interest rates will remain at present levels for an extended period of time in view of the current outlook for inflation”. He also added that “if required, we will act swiftly with further monetary policy easing. The Governing Council is unanimous in its commitment to using also unconventional instruments within its mandate should it become necessary to further address risks of too prolonged a period of low inflation.”With this statement, the ECB has left no doubts about its resolve to avoid any downward turn in the euro area inflation developments, because such developments would be extremely harmful. With interest rates at their effective lower bound and persistently timid growth prospects, lower than expected inflation rates would increase the real value of debt, slowing down the deleveraging process of borrowers, both public and private. If a low inflation outlook became entrenched in the expectations of firms and households, the real interest rate would rise, leading consumers and investors to postpone their expenditure plans. A vicious circle of lower demand and lower prices could ensue.But what exactly could the ECB do in the face of a protracted period of low inflation and economic stagnation?As I have already mentioned, the ECB stands ready to deploy additional unconventional instruments, should the likelihood of this scenario increase. The policy response would involve a broad-based asset-purchase programme. The experience of other countries with such programmes testifies that they can be effectively designed. As previously mentioned, various empirical studies suggest that the large purchases carried out in the U.S. and in the U.K. were instrumental in decreasing yields by several tens of basis points, with spillover effects on other asset prices, including mortgage rates and exchange rates. In turn, GDP growth and inflation rates also appear to have been significantly affected. After all, even if they have to use new instruments, central banks cannot avoid their responsibility in ensuring price stability, as long as inflation continues to be determined by monetary policy. Broad-based asset-purchases would allow the ECB to continue pursuing its mandate even under more adverse circumstances. It is however important that other policies also play their part. An extreme adverse scenario that has recently appeared in the public debate is that of a “secular stagnation”. [8] This is effectively a situation where the “natural” long run growth rate of the economy falls significantly and permanently, e.g. because of a fall in the growth rate of population or because of a fall in technological progress, or both. This scenario is only still a possibility, but it is illustrative of a broader need for structural policies to again unleash the growth potential of our economies. Public spending should be redirected towards public investment in infrastructures and education. International trade and labour mobility should be fostered. These are the best recipes to ensure that the secular stagnation will remain a purely academic hypothesis.Today, I have focused on the low inflation challenges, but let me conclude with a quick reminder that we remain watchful of financial market developments. A necessary condition to ensure the effectiveness of our intended monetary policy stance is to alleviate credit supply constraints. This explains why new targeted LTROs are part of the package of measures decided by the Governing Council in June. To sum up, the main challenge monetary policy faces in the euro area today is to avert the risk of a prolonged period of excessively low inflation. The ECB has adopted significant new measures in June to ensure a return of inflation to levels closer to 2% and to safeguard the anchoring of medium to long-term inflation expectations. It also has powder left for an additional expansion of the monetary policy stance, in case of downward departures of inflation and inflation expectations from current projections. [1] For a survey of results, see John Williams (2013), President of the San Francisco FED, “Lessons from the financial crisis for unconventional monetary policy” NBER Conference, October. See also Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2013), “The Ins and Outs of LSAPs,” presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Jackson Hole Symposium on the Global Dimensions of Unconventional Monetary Policy; IMF Policy Paper on “Global impact and challenges of unconventional monetary policies”, October; Neely, C. (2013), ""Unconventional Monetary Policy Had Large International Effects"", Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper 2010-018E, updated August 2013; Joyce, M., M. Tong and R. Woods (2011), “The United Kingdom’s quantitative easing policy: design, operation and impact”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q3.[2] Quoted by Michael Woodford in his 2012 Jackson Hole paper “Methods of policy accommodation at the interest rate lower bound” [3]See Giannone, D., M. Lenza, H. Pill and L. Reichlin (2011): “Non-standard policy measures and monetary developments”, ECB Working Paper Series No. 1290; De Pooter, M., R.F. Martin, and S. Pruitt (2012): “The effects of official bond market intervention in Europe”, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, mimeo; Eser, F., and B. Schwaab (2013): “The yield impact of central bank asset purchases: The case of the ECB’s Securities Markets Programme”, ECB Working Paper Series No. 1587 and Ghysels, E., J. Idier, S. Manganelli, and O. Vergote (2014): “A high frequency assessment of the ECB Securities Markets Programme”, ECB Working Paper Series No. 1642; Altavilla, C., D. Giannone, and M. Lenza (2014): “The financial and macroeconomic effects of the OMT announcements”, CSEF Working Paper No. 352.[4]See, for example, Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2013), “Is The Phillips Curve Alive and Well After All? Inﬂation Expectations and the Missing Disinﬂation,” NBER Working Paper 19598; see also Hall, R.E. (2011), “The Long Slump,” American Economic Review 101, pp. 431–469; and Ball, L. and S. Mazumder (2011), “Inﬂation Dynamics and the Great Recession,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 337–402.[5]For a formal analysis of this point, see Del Negro, M., M. Giannoni and F. Schorfeide (2013), “Inflation in the Great Recession and New Keynesian Models”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 618.[6]Schwaab, B. (2013): “The impact of the ECB’s forward guidance”, ECB mimeo.[7] The Additional Credit Claims (ACC) programme is an extension of our collateral policy to accept directly loans to non-financial firms as eligible collateral for banks to borrow from the ECB.[8]See e.g. Krugman, P (2013) “Secular Stagnation, Coalmines, Bubbles, and Larry Summers” http://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com; Krugman, P. (2014) “Inflation Targets Reconsidered”, presented at ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra; Summers, L. (2013) “Remarks at IMF Fourteenth Annual Research Conference in Honor of Stanley Fischer’’; Eggertsson, G. and Mehrotra, N. (2014) “A model of Secular Stagnation”, mimeo.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen seven year pass sinc financi market turmoil summer mark begin financi crisi ensu recess year challeng central bank mark end long period remark stabl good macroeconom perform widespread adopt explicit price stabil object conduc low inflat outcom environ prolong econom growth exist monetari polici strategi most variant inflat target model though notabl except ecb feder reserv appear adequ suffici attain goal consist tinbergen principl primari object price stabil achiev everywher singl convent monetari polici instrument shortterm interest rate global financi crisi chang situat abrupt sinc central bank endow addit macroprudenti instrument explicit mandat preserv financi stabil explicit chang monetari polici strategi taken place fair say generalis increas attent paid bank balanc sheet condit evolut credit far visibl innov sinc begin great recess howev increas array instrument use monetari polici purpos particular forward guidanc interest rate notabl use central bank balanc sheet larg scale asset purchas lsap e quantit eas qe theoret debat propos made name chang target monetari polici price level target nomin gdp simpli increas establish object inflat target regim practic reason propos retain forward guidanc qe new instrument choic mani central bank crisi establish instrument monetari polici shortterm interest rate steer either tradit openmarket oper buy sell secur temporari lend bank via repo like ecb case crisi major central bank signific increas balanc sheet respect monetari base chart would nevertheless mislead compar chang balanc sheet size origin polici consequ impact case ecb differ central bank expans balanc sheet happen result lend bank repo differ matur increas balanc sheet depend demand primari liquid bank facilit howev provis liquid regim fix rate full allot bank demand introduc septemb impact overal monetari condit crisi depend behaviour bank passthrough higher monetari base credit broad money happen happen justifi fulfil role lender last resort new type monetari polici instrument sens aim new transmiss channel adopt fixedr full allot regim liquid provis place sinc recent extend decemb least inde extraordinari unconvent measur support bank sector avoid detriment credit crunch howev size monetari base declin signific bank decid start repay previous high borrow hand per follow tabl total outright purchas asset ecb two differ programm behind increas balanc sheet repres relat small proport total asset compar central bank tabl crisi method conduct liquid manag transact via outright purchas lend bank previous mention object steer shortterm interest rate close polici rate decid central bank would therefor mislead interpret increas bank balanc sheet lsap qe increas scale tradit outright purchas differ object interven direct differ asset market higher matur order influenc respect price yield intent composit asset purchas thus relev differ previous done manag shortterm rate qe sever transmiss channel besid direct impact pricesyield purchas asset treasuri abss trigger portfolio adjust asset like equiti exchang rate accompani wealth effect theoret debat exact channel transmiss remain activ mani event timeseri studi tri measur qe effect william present survey sever studi report usd billion fed asset purchas achiev result equival cut feder fund rate percentag point concern express various economist media extraordinari increas monetari base mani countri would lead signific inflat rate never materialis follow slide illustr transmiss prevail econom situat bank credit broad money aggreg inflat respond put doubt quantit vision origin ask japan overcom deflat milton friedman answer simpl buy longterm govern secur keep buy provid highpow money highpow money start get economi expans recent japanes experi still open analysi channel envis milton friedman seem oper advanc economi mention transmiss channel play recent qe experi inde differ tradit quantit view chart financi crisi led great recess evolv european sovereign debt crisi ecb start provid liquid fixedr full allot mode progress consider extend matur loan commerci bank widen set elig collater made mediumscal purchas financi asset announc outright monetari transact programm result extraordinari measur end calm start return financi market lead lower financi spread reduct volatil initi sign econom recoveri start appear preliminari formal analys indic nonstandard measur instrument support financi intermedi econom activ euro area despit recent encourag develop financi side real economi recoveri weak inflat outcom surpris low new challeng face euro area today avert risk prolong period excess low inflat euro area annual hicp inflat may averag first four month year june eurosystem staff macroeconom project forese gradual increas annual hicp inflat toward level consist definit price stabil pace increas howev slow inflat expect reach uncertain three figur revis downward comparison march ecb staff macroeconom project portray situat distant object keep inflat close mediumterm inflat develop alon go long way motiv combin measur announc govern council ecb june provid addit monetari polici accommod support lend real economi packag includ reduct key ecb interest rate new longerterm refinanc oper target stimul credit creation preparatori work relat outright purchas assetback secur addit ecb commit extens fixedr full allot regim tender procedur decid suspend week finetun oper sterilis liquid inject secur market programm time measur contribut return inflat level closer safeguard anchor medium longterm inflat expect nevertheless polici interest rate close effect lower bound persist timid growth prospect small noninsignific risk addit advers shock may open door protract period low inflat background would like organis rest remark today around three issu first find current low inflat predica sustain inflat fluctuat somewhat surpris ever sinc begin great recess part result advers exogen shock extent howev also connect unwarr variat market expect futur stanc monetari polici second argu govern council meet begin june import decis actual adopt import also clear signal provid determin futur event addit downward pressur inflat develop two point deal way recent polici decis produc effect third question would ecb react risk protract period low inflat materialis point time essenti scenario analysi specif analysi low probabl scenario outright purchas rang financi asset would effect situat structur reform would also essenti spur econom growth euro area inflat develop past six year remark volatil peak juli hicp inflat fell mark trough recess reach negat level short period june octob howev second half price start increas also due rise energi price spite persist level econom slack hicp inflat climb rapid steadili peak septemb novemb similar develop could observ u inflat remain stabl declin first month gave rise debat miss disinfl develop somewhat surpris swift recent inflat dynam display remark high degre persist euro area inflat start fall continu date sinc octob yearonyear rate growth headlin hicp oscil spite slowli consolid econom recoveri situat low inflat common mani advanc economi creat moral general puzzl lack tight relationship inflat develop estim slack econom activ output gap surpris point view modern monetari theori new keynesian phillip curv suggest net errat factor inflat determin whole path expect futur output gap current level henc econom slack given point time need associ deflationari episod accompani expect output gap eventu turn suffici posit turn expect futur stanc monetari polici play key role determin expect futur output gap absenc persist disinfl may thus ascrib monetari accommod impart mani central bank end standard nonstandard tool monetari polici eas commensur size shock e rough offset disinflationari pressur produc recess recent fall inflat could equival ascrib unwarr fear possibl tighten monetari polici stanc far futur fear could clear observ one year ago feder reserv announc taper largescal asset purchas spite clear fed communic disconnect decis time liftoff polici interest rate taper announc quick led rise forward interest rate side atlant ecb adopt forward guidanc juli larg result unwarr develop recent studi confirm forward guidanc success revers previous increas forwardr clarifi persist accommod inton ecb polici stanc market logic led interpret fed taper announc signal forthcom tighten polici interest rate may also appli interpret implic reduct size ecb balanc sheet occur past coupl year total dimens equal gdp june balanc sheet shrunk may result bank decis exercis earli repay option outstand year ltros contract ecb balanc sheet particular strike compar balanc sheet feder reserv continu expand gdp end may develop accompani similar evolut respect monetari base joint interpret signal relat evolut futur polici rate two monetari area may contribut sustain appreci exchang rate euro u dollar went juli peak may lag impact mark euro appreci play import role determin recent low inflat outcom sinc mid exchang rate appreci estim explain decreas percentag point inflat rate togeth fall energi food price explain bulk import downsid pressur euro area consum price cours euro appreci may also reflect factor exampl chang attitud toward risk factor expect produc temporari effect inflat would therefor normal requir monetari polici respons unwarr fluctuat market percept futur stanc monetari polici howev could persist sourc lowinfl risk case monetari polici reaction would necessari steer percept away unlik futur outcom standpoint believ three clear channel decis adopt govern council june effect first channel standard expansionari impact measur real economi inflat gaug extent impact use refer ecb macroeconom project recal condit number technic assumpt assumpt relat evolut macroeconom financi variabl specif includ market expect shortterm interest rate develop project horizon condit assumpt june project comput base inform avail may past month financi market price adjust reflect ecb decis earli june result expect shortterm rate fallen basi point horizon euro depreci sinc may taken new condit assumpt develop would move whole path inflat project upward ensur faster return price stabil second channel recent ecb decis consequenti credit channel expect posit impact new target ltro facil extens acc programm third channel expect announc measur adopt begin june accompani clear communic concern futur path polici press confer presid draghi emphasis key ecb interest rate remain present level extend period time view current outlook inflat also ad requir act swift monetari polici eas govern council unanim commit use also unconvent instrument within mandat becom necessari address risk prolong period low inflat statement ecb left doubt resolv avoid downward turn euro area inflat develop develop would extrem harm interest rate effect lower bound persist timid growth prospect lower expect inflat rate would increas real valu debt slow deleverag process borrow public privat low inflat outlook becam entrench expect firm household real interest rate would rise lead consum investor postpon expenditur plan vicious circl lower demand lower price could ensu exact could ecb face protract period low inflat econom stagnat alreadi mention ecb stand readi deploy addit unconvent instrument likelihood scenario increas polici respons would involv broadbas assetpurchas programm experi countri programm testifi effect design previous mention various empir studi suggest larg purchas carri u u k instrument decreas yield sever ten basi point spillov effect asset price includ mortgag rate exchang rate turn gdp growth inflat rate also appear signific affect even use new instrument central bank cannot avoid respons ensur price stabil long inflat continu determin monetari polici broadbas assetpurchas would allow ecb continu pursu mandat even advers circumst howev import polici also play part extrem advers scenario recent appear public debat secular stagnat effect situat natur long run growth rate economi fall signific perman e g fall growth rate popul fall technolog progress scenario still possibl illustr broader need structur polici unleash growth potenti economi public spend redirect toward public invest infrastructur educ intern trade labour mobil foster best recip ensur secular stagnat remain pure academ hypothesi today focus low inflat challeng let conclud quick remind remain watch financi market develop necessari condit ensur effect intend monetari polici stanc allevi credit suppli constraint explain new target ltros part packag measur decid govern council june sum main challeng monetari polici face euro area today avert risk prolong period excess low inflat ecb adopt signific new measur june ensur return inflat level closer safeguard anchor medium longterm inflat expect also powder left addit expans monetari polici stanc case downward departur inflat inflat expect current project survey result see william presid san francisco fed lesson financi crisi unconvent monetari polici nber confer octob see also krishnamurthi vissingjorgensen in out lsap present feder reserv bank kansa citi jackson hole symposium global dimens unconvent monetari polici imf polici paper global impact challeng unconvent monetari polici octob neeli c unconvent monetari polici larg intern effect feder reserv bank st loui work paper e updat august joyc m m tong r wood unit kingdom quantit eas polici design oper impact bank england quarter bulletin q quot woodford jackson hole paper method polici accommod interest rate lower bound see giannon d m lenza h pill l reichlin nonstandard polici measur monetari develop ecb work paper seri de pooter m r f pruitt effect offici bond market intervent europ feder reserv board governor mimeo eser f b schwaab yield impact central bank asset purchas case ecb secur market programm ecb work paper seri ghysel e j idier manganelli o vergot high frequenc assess ecb secur market programm ecb work paper seri altavilla c d giannon m lenza financi macroeconom effect omt announc csef work paper see exampl coibion o y gorodnichenko phillip curv aliv well inﬂat expect miss disinﬂ nber work paper see also hall r e long slump american econom review pp ball l mazumd inﬂat dynam great recess brook paper econom activ spring formal analysi point see del negro m m giannoni f schorfeid inflat great recess new keynesian model feder reserv bank new york staff report schwaab b impact ecb forward guidanc ecb mimeo addit credit claim acc programm extens collater polici accept direct loan nonfinanci firm elig collater bank borrow ecb see e g krugman p secular stagnat coalmin bubbl larri summer http krugman blog nytim com krugman p inflat target reconsid present ecb forum central bank sintra summer l remark imf fourteenth annual research confer honor stanley fischer eggertsson g mehrotra n model secular stagnat mimeo reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en