Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The financial crisis – looking back and the way forward,22-01-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,2162,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen, [1]It is a great pleasure for me to speak here in Brussels at the European Economic and Social Committee conference. I would like to thank the organisers for their invitation and the opportunity to share with you some remarks on the current developments in financial markets and the response of the public authorities.We are facing a severe financial crisis. While the full economic consequences are still unknown, the declining pace of economic activity in the second half of 2008 and data from the labour market show that the real economy in the euro area as well as abroad is deeply affected. In the middle of this stormy and challenging situation there is still reason to be confident. The euro is now 10 years old. And it has shown to be a great success! Since its introduction on 1 January 1999, the common currency has succeeded in maintaining price stability in the euro area. And most recently, it also had the chance to prove itself as a strong anchor, able to weather even the severe financial turbulence that we are experiencing. For example, by joining the euro area, its member countries eliminated the risk of exchange rate volatility between each other. And the stability of the euro area in this crisis seems to have attracted more support for euro area membership in European countries that have not adopted the euro yet. Even if the current situation is far from benign, I believe it would have been more difficult without the euro.[Slide 2 - Overview]But let me now take a closer look at the developments in financial markets over the last months. I will then turn to the various ways in which we have addressed the challenges arising from the crisis. Before I conclude, I will also explain to you what I think needs to be done in the coming months. [Slide 3]The combined strength of the various shocks which have affected the global financial system since the outbreak of the financial turmoil in the summer of 2007 has been broadly unexpected. However, the crisis as such cannot be regarded as a complete surprise. It did not build up overnight but instead has developed gradually over several years. But what factors lie behind the current turmoil? The pre-crisis global macroeconomic environment was characterised by low interest rates, low inflation and sustained economic growth. This strengthened investors’ risk appetite and contributed to the underestimation and under-pricing of risk. The intensified search for yield fostered the proliferation of innovative financial instruments such as structured finance products. Rising leverage and excessive credit growth increased the vulnerability of the financial system.This fragility set the stage for the turbulence in financial markets which started in summer 2007. With the end of the boom in the US housing market and increasing interest rates on sub-prime mortgages, delinquency rates on mortgage loans rose. The value of mortgage-backed securities dropped heavily. From the sub-prime market segment, the tensions gradually spilled over to most other asset markets, in particular the credit derivatives markets, corporate bond and equity markets, and also to the money markets, not only in the US but also in the euro area and elsewhere. With the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers on 15 September 2008, the crisis sharply intensified.Let me now illustrate the developments in financial markets since the beginning of the turbulence with the help of some charts.[Slide 4 - Chart 1] Chart 1 shows the recent movements in euro area stock prices, represented by the Dow Jones Euro Stoxx index. From 15 September 2008 until mid-January 2009, this broad index declined dramatically, losing about 30% of its value. Since July 2008, the index has declined even more, by about 50%. As you can see from the chart, the most severe stock market losses occurred in the banking sector, with a decline of about 50% since mid-September 2008 and about 70% since summer 2007.[Slide 5 - Chart 2] Chart 2 illustrates the exceptionally high level of uncertainty in stock markets, here measured by implied volatility taken from stock options on the Dow Jones Euro Stoxx 50 index. In autumn 2008, implied volatility skyrocketed to new historical highs not only in the euro area but across the globe.]At the heart of the crisis has been a general deterioration of confidence in the health of the banking sector and worries about a weakening economic outlook. This has led to a gradual and global repricing of credit risk. [Slide 6 - Chart 3]As shown in Chart 3, the yield spread between corporate bonds and government bonds has widened markedly. In particular, lower-grade financial firms have been affected mainly on account of increased credit risk perceptions and a much lower general risk appetite.[Slide 7 - Chart 4]Perhaps the most striking indicator of the various stages in the current crisis is the spread between the three-month Euribor, an indicative rate for unsecured lending among banks, and the three-month euro overnight index average (Eonia) swap rate (Chart 4). A strong increase of the spread in summer 2007 and in September 2008 reflects the reluctance of banks to lend to each other, closely related to a general lack of transparency about the risks individual banks have been carrying on their books.In aggregate terms, credit market-related writedowns of financial institutions amounted worldwide to USD 780 billion in mid-January 2009. For the euro area, losses of USD 134 billion have been realised. These writedowns and declining bank profits have likely contributed to a slowdown in banks’ loan supply to the non-financial sector. And the profitability of financial institutions might face further downside risks in the months and quarters ahead. The risks arise from excessive investments in particular in the credit derivatives markets and, most recently, from a dramatic weakening in economic activity, as indicated by the latest survey data for November and December 2008. All this is part of our recent assessment of the outlook for economic growth in the euro area. [Slide 8]How have the public authorities and in particular the Eurosystem reacted to these developments? The Eurosystem has shown a remarkable flexibility in terms of liquidity provision since the start of the crisis in summer 2007. This flexibility was necessary in order to compensate for the shortage of liquidity in the interbank market,, which is very important for the transmission channel of monetary policy. Thereby, our liquidity operations have contributed to avoiding further increases in the funding costs of banks and their customers. In October 2008, markets entered a downward spiral in which even sound banks were threatened by the possibility of illiquidity which could quickly turn into insolvency. The common European action plan agreed to by the EU and national authorities in October showed the ability of European and national authorities to live up to their responsibilities and to act in a swift and concerted manner. The ECB contributed to the European action plan through a further widening of its liquidity operations as well as by issuing recommendations on recapitalisations and on the pricing of government guarantees. The ECB has swiftly and substantially cut the main refinancing rate – four times since October – by a total of 225 basis points against diminishing inflationary pressures and downward risks to the real economy. I think the liquidity policy, government measures and interest rate decisions that have been taken were decisive in breaking the downward spiral in the financial sector in October. The first signs of positive effects are visible: spreads in the interbank market have come down from their peaks in October and November last year, although they still stand at historically high levels. [Slide 9 - Chart 5]In particular, as Chart 5 shows, banks have begun to pass on the ECB’s interest rate cuts to bank lending rates to non-financial corporations and households. At the same time, the growth rate in the volume of loans to the private sector has fallen. We are aware that the crisis is far from over, we are aware that the effects on the real economy have only started to be felt and we also are aware that there are substantial differences between euro area countries. Let me also explain why the public authorities have acted the way they did. First of all, rescuing the banking sector is no end in itself. The banking sector is of systemic importance for the whole economy. A breakdown of financial intermediation would severely damage all other sectors in the economy. Historical evidence shows that banking crises can have seriously negative effects on GDP. In Europe, we experienced such effects in Finland and Sweden in the early 1990s. [2]Hence, we need a financial system that can finance investment, innovation and ideas. All measures taken aim at supporting trust in the financial system and preventing constraints on credit supply.Nevertheless, I think it is also important to emphasise that there are limits to what policy-makers can achieve. As unsustainable developments in certain market segments and geographical regions have partly caused the crisis, adjustments have been necessary. Monetary and fiscal policies are needed to smoothen out the adjustment process and to prevent negative overshooting. At the same time it is important to maintain the confidence of the public in the long-run sustainability of public finances. [Slide 10]At the same time, the private sector and public authorities are not helplessly exposed to the forces that caused the crisis. Various initiatives at national, European and international level aim to improve the financial system.Of these initiatives, I would like to highlight three areas where I think change is particularly needed because they were primary causes of the current financial crisis: first, the internal risk management systems of financial institutions and compensation frameworks in general need to be aligned with requirements for sustainable development. Private sector entities can shape the rules mainly within their own organisations to avoid short-termism. Second, transparency in all respects is necessary in order to make informed investment decisions. For example, the ECB welcomes the initiatives to create central counterparties for credit default swaps and expects to see concrete results. Third, although business cycles are a common characteristic of market economies, public authorities should shape the economic order in ways that limit the probability and extent of future crises. In this context, regulatory and supervisory bodies have to ensure that their regulations and actions do not amplify business cycles. The current review of capital requirements in the financial sector is an important device for making risk measurement and management more effective and comprehensive. Guidance concerning liquidity risk management has already been published. Moreover, a debate on improvements in accounting rules is ongoing. In this respect, fair-value accounting rules should be changed to reduce a tendency to magnify boom-and-bust cycles. Marking-to-market practices provide timely and relevant information on the state of financial firms under normal market conditions. Yet, they may also trigger negative feedback effects when markets are disrupted, as financial institutions may be required to sell assets into falling markets, exacerbating the asset price decline. Furthermore, accounting rules should support banks in building buffers during good times against future losses. Responding to the financial crisis by supporting trust in the financial system, by preventing constraints on credit supply and by addressing the shortcomings in the financial system that I have just mentioned – these are our most immediate concerns. At the same time, we must not forget that the long-term prosperity of the European Union does not only depend on a sound financial system. In order to increase Europe’s long-term growth potential, to promote the creation of jobs and to increase the resilience of the economy to shocks, the implementation of the Lisbon strategy for growth and jobs remains of key importance. In particular, investments in innovation, education, qualification of the labor force, and competive markets should become the focus of policies again. [Slide 11]Let me summarise the main points: we are experiencing a severe financial crisis that has started to show substantial spillover effects to the real economy in the euro area. We have seen that European policy-makers have lived up to their responsibilities and acted in a swift and concerted manner. At the same time, we have to acknowledge that we are going through a phase of necessary adjustment after a period of excessive risk-taking in the global economy. We have developed a number of initiatives at European and international level to improve upon the existing framework. Once again, history has proven Jean Monnet’s wisdom when he said: “People only accept change when they are faced with necessity, and only recognise necessity when a crisis is upon them.” It is now time to accept change and implement the proposals. The Eurosystem is ready to actively contribute to the implementation of reforms wherever necessary.Thank you very much for your attention. C. Reinhart and K. Rogoff (2008), Banking Crises: An Equal Opportunity Menace, NBER Working Paper No. 14587.C. Reinhart and K. Rogoff (2009), The Aftermath of Financial Crises, paper presented at the American Economic Association Meeting in San Francisco, 3 January 2009.[1] I am very grateful to Kevin Koerner and Stephan Sauer for their valuable input.[2] See Reinhart and Rogoff (2008, 2009) for a comprehensive overview of financial crises and their impact on real GDP. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur speak brussel european econom social committe confer would like thank organis invit opportun share remark current develop financi market respons public author face sever financi crisi full econom consequ still unknown declin pace econom activ second half data labour market show real economi euro area well abroad deepli affect middl stormi challeng situat still reason confid euro year old shown great success sinc introduct januari common currenc succeed maintain price stabil euro area recent also chanc prove strong anchor abl weather even sever financi turbul experienc exampl join euro area member countri elimin risk exchang rate volatil stabil euro area crisi seem attract support euro area membership european countri adopt euro yet even current situat far benign believ would difficult without euro slide overview let take closer look develop financi market last month turn various way address challeng aris crisi conclud also explain think need done come month slide combin strength various shock affect global financi system sinc outbreak financi turmoil summer broad unexpect howev crisi cannot regard complet surpris build overnight instead develop gradual sever year factor lie behind current turmoil precrisi global macroeconom environ characteris low interest rate low inflat sustain econom growth strengthen investor risk appetit contribut underestim underpr risk intensifi search yield foster prolifer innov financi instrument structur financ product rise leverag excess credit growth increas vulner financi system fragil set stage turbul financi market start summer end boom us hous market increas interest rate subprim mortgag delinqu rate mortgag loan rose valu mortgageback secur drop heavili subprim market segment tension gradual spill asset market particular credit deriv market corpor bond equiti market also money market us also euro area elsewher bankruptci lehman brother septemb crisi sharpli intensifi let illustr develop financi market sinc begin turbul help chart slide chart chart show recent movement euro area stock price repres dow jone euro stoxx index septemb midjanuari broad index declin dramat lose valu sinc juli index declin even see chart sever stock market loss occur bank sector declin sinc midseptemb sinc summer slide chart chart illustr except high level uncertainti stock market measur impli volatil taken stock option dow jone euro stoxx index autumn impli volatil skyrocket new histor high euro area across globe heart crisi general deterior confid health bank sector worri weaken econom outlook led gradual global repric credit risk slide chart shown chart yield spread corpor bond govern bond widen mark particular lowergrad financi firm affect main account increas credit risk percept much lower general risk appetit slide chart perhap strike indic various stage current crisi spread threemonth euribor indic rate unsecur lend among bank threemonth euro overnight index averag eonia swap rate chart strong increas spread summer septemb reflect reluct bank lend close relat general lack transpar risk individu bank carri book aggreg term credit marketrel writedown financi institut amount worldwid usd billion midjanuari euro area loss usd billion realis writedown declin bank profit like contribut slowdown bank loan suppli nonfinanci sector profit financi institut might face downsid risk month quarter ahead risk aris excess invest particular credit deriv market recent dramat weaken econom activ indic latest survey data novemb decemb part recent assess outlook econom growth euro area slide public author particular eurosystem react develop eurosystem shown remark flexibl term liquid provis sinc start crisi summer flexibl necessari order compens shortag liquid interbank market import transmiss channel monetari polici therebi liquid oper contribut avoid increas fund cost bank custom octob market enter downward spiral even sound bank threaten possibl illiquid could quick turn insolv common european action plan agre eu nation author octob show abil european nation author live respons act swift concert manner ecb contribut european action plan widen liquid oper well issu recommend recapitalis price govern guarante ecb swift substanti cut main refinanc rate four time sinc octob total basi point diminish inflationari pressur downward risk real economi think liquid polici govern measur interest rate decis taken decis break downward spiral financi sector octob first sign posit effect visibl spread interbank market come peak octob novemb last year although still stand histor high level slide chart particular chart show bank begun pass ecb interest rate cut bank lend rate nonfinanci corpor household time growth rate volum loan privat sector fallen awar crisi far awar effect real economi start felt also awar substanti differ euro area countri let also explain public author act way first rescu bank sector end bank sector system import whole economi breakdown financi intermedi would sever damag sector economi histor evid show bank crise serious negat effect gdp europ experienc effect finland sweden earli henc need financi system financ invest innov idea measur taken aim support trust financi system prevent constraint credit suppli nevertheless think also import emphasis limit policymak achiev unsustain develop certain market segment geograph region part caus crisi adjust necessari monetari fiscal polici need smoothen adjust process prevent negat overshoot time import maintain confid public longrun sustain public financ slide time privat sector public author helpless expos forc caus crisi various initi nation european intern level aim improv financi system initi would like highlight three area think chang particular need primari caus current financi crisi first intern risk manag system financi institut compens framework general need align requir sustain develop privat sector entiti shape rule main within organis avoid shortterm second transpar respect necessari order make inform invest decis exampl ecb welcom initi creat central counterparti credit default swap expect see concret result third although busi cycl common characterist market economi public author shape econom order way limit probabl extent futur crise context regulatori supervisori bodi ensur regul action amplifi busi cycl current review capit requir financi sector import devic make risk measur manag effect comprehens guidanc concern liquid risk manag alreadi publish moreov debat improv account rule ongo respect fairvalu account rule chang reduc tendenc magnifi boomandbust cycl markingtomarket practic provid time relev inform state financi firm normal market condit yet may also trigger negat feedback effect market disrupt financi institut may requir sell asset fall market exacerb asset price declin furthermor account rule support bank build buffer good time futur loss respond financi crisi support trust financi system prevent constraint credit suppli address shortcom financi system mention immedi concern time must forget longterm prosper european union depend sound financi system order increas europ longterm growth potenti promot creation job increas resili economi shock implement lisbon strategi growth job remain key import particular invest innov educ qualif labor forc compet market becom focus polici slide let summaris main point experienc sever financi crisi start show substanti spillov effect real economi euro area seen european policymak live respons act swift concert manner time acknowledg go phase necessari adjust period excess risktak global economi develop number initi european intern level improv upon exist framework histori proven jean monnet wisdom said peopl accept chang face necess recognis necess crisi upon time accept chang implement propos eurosystem readi activ contribut implement reform wherev necessari thank much attent c reinhart k rogoff bank crise equal opportun menac nber work paper c reinhart k rogoff aftermath financi crise paper present american econom associ meet san francisco januari grate kevin koerner stephan sauer valuabl input see reinhart rogoff comprehens overview financi crise impact real gdp reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en