Jean-Claude Trichet: “What role for finance?”,06-05-2010,European Central Bank,ECB,4240,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,I would like to thank Universidade Nova very warmly for the kind invitation and the opportunity to deliver a lecture here.I have chosen the title “What role for finance?” because the past three years have taught us how important it is to reflect on this question. And I have chosen it for a university lecture because I believe that university researchers – and the young people they educate – will make a vital contribution to re-thinking the role of finance in our societies. Finance touches virtually every sphere of human endeavour – from individuals and households to corporations and governments. But the crisis has posed a provocative question to which many people would like an answer: why and to what extent does society need finance? In recent economic history, the answer has always been dependent on circumstances. In times of affluence, when finance makes lenders and borrowers alike rich and respected, the answer is resoundingly positive. In contrast, in times of economic regress, disillusionment with markets suggests to an embittered public that financiers of all kinds are the same as short-term speculators motivated by greed. I will try to bring a timeless perspective to these vacillating public attitudes towards finance. To anticipate my line of reasoning, I think that – at a minimum – the crisis has belied the long-standing conviction in macroeconomics, that “ where enterprise leads, finance follows”. Contrary to Joan Robinson’s 1952 dictum, I think that financial structures are part of the deep texture of an economy. They are relevant for trend growth and for shaping the business cycle around the trend. Here, I side more with Joseph Schumpeter, who in 1934 wrote: “He (the banker) stands between those who wish to form new combinations and the possessors of productive means… He is the ephor (the overseer) of the exchange economy”. At the same time, and again in contrast to Joan Robinson’s view of “finance as a veil”, I see financial structures as a prime source of aggregate uncertainty. The economic relevance of shocks that originate in the markets for lending and borrowing is incalculable. It cannot be measured in normal times. It is difficult to quantify even in times of crisis. But we all know that it is large, and that no society can afford to let finance sever its ties to the real economy. Yet, over the past two decades, financial players have gradually expanded their activities beyond Schumpeter’s idea of intermediation between savers and investors. The financial sector has gradually and quietly decoupled – at least in part – from the real economy. Financial innovations and the trading book are increasingly seen as a more profitable business line than extending loans to businesses. Credit default swaps, asset-backed securities and collateralised debt obligations are the most illustrative examples of this change of focus. In my remarks today I will discuss this quiet shift in the paradigm of finance. I will explore how finance creates economic value, and why – at times – it can do more harm than good. I will conclude by proposing a way forward – a way that discourages business models oriented to the short term, that promotes healthy financial innovation and that ensures long-term financial stability. Let me start with my provocative question: why and to what extent does society need finance? Beyond the sanctification of finance in booms and the banker-bashing in crises – society does need finance. Society needs finance for five key reasons that give economic value to financial intermediation: [1]First, external finance reduces the need for self-finance. Self-finance constrains investment. Second, finance provides screening and monitoring services that help society to evaluate and rank investment projects.Third, finance facilitates the management and diversification of risk. Otherwise, entrepreneurs would find many sources of risk unbearable.Fourth, finance promotes the transformation of liquidity. Savers place high value on liquidity while investors need the opportunity to invest long-term.And fifth, finance facilitates the process of price discovery. The first function, the provision of external funds, is most apparent in the economics of industrial revolutions. What drove the industrial revolution in England in the 18th century? True, in those days the initial outlays for setting up a business were relatively modest: production facilities were small and machinery was cheap. So retained earnings from craftsmanship, family equity or loans from relatives or friends were the dominant form of finance. [2]But the true inflection point in the economic fortunes of nations – the point at which the pattern of growth turned definitively upwards – did not come until heavy capital investments could lengthen the life of the production cycle. A steady rise in the wealth of nations required a large injection of capital. [3] Without access to credit, such large upfront payments of production resources simply would not have been possible. Without credit, production processes are constrained to an economically inefficient scale. [4] The opportunity to borrow against future income streams reduced the constraints on the ability of entrepreneurs to invest in bigger machines and larger premises. Today, access to external funding is no less important. It has the potential to spur economic innovation and allows production facilities to be operated efficiently through standing credit lines. Access to credit is not only important for businesses. Students can receive a loan in expectation of the higher income that they are likely to earn later in their lives. Student loans permit the enjoyment of the benefits of a higher education at a time in life when income is low. Credit makes promising projects possible – whether they are embodied in physical capital or in better education. The provision of screening and monitoring services is the second key function of finance. Specialised screening of the quality of borrowers is an effective remedy against the problem of adverse selection in credit markets. Financial intermediaries acquire, process and evaluate information about potential borrowers. In doing so, they help reduce the large costs that we – as individuals – would face if lending of savings were not intermediated. Likewise, banks are more effective at monitoring the behaviour of borrowers after funds have been allocated. They can thereby reduce the costs associated with moral hazard – a situation in which asymmetric information can lead borrowers to take action that erodes the value of the loan. Stock markets can also perform this duty. Influential research literature claims that liquid stock markets help foster corporate governance and hence reduce moral hazard. [5] The basic intuition is straightforward. If managerial compensation is directly linked to stock market performance, either through contracts or stock ownership, managers have an incentive to select and implement actions that increase shareholder wealth. The transformation and management of risk – the third key function of financial institutions in modern societies – became the focus of attention during the recent financial crisis. I will turn to the dark side of this function later. For now, let me stress the potential value of risk management. Financial markets provide savers with a large array of instruments that allow them to diversify the risks associated with their investments along two broad dimensions: across firms, industries and nations; and over time. [6] Financial markets also allow entrepreneurs to manage risks from sources such as movements of interest rates or currencies.Financial institutions are able to hedge another type of risk – liquidity risk. Liquidity transformation – the fourth function in my list – helps control liquidity risk for the aggregate economy. Individuals generally express a high preference for liquidity in anticipation of uncertain future disbursements. So, there is a tendency – on the lenders’ side – for a large share of savings to be held in cash, or in very short-term debt instruments. Borrowers, however, typically require loans with a long maturity. The more potentially lucrative a project, the more deferred its economic payoffs. We can see here the emergence of a trade-off between the social value of a long-term investment and the private value of liquidity. Financial intermediaries – in particular depository institutions – reconcile the trade-off. By engaging in maturity transformation, they make it possible for socially-valued long-term projects to be funded by privately-desirable liquidity. Likewise, well-developed equity markets constitute a permanent source of funding for companies while savers are able quickly and easily to convert their shares back into cash. The final key function of finance is “ price discovery.” In textbook financial markets, asset prices on average reflect all economically relevant information. The market force that moves the trading system close to this ideal – in which prices are “correct” given the current state of knowledge – is arbitrage, the simultaneous purchase and sale of the same asset in two different markets at advantageously different prices. By engaging in arbitrage, financial players eliminate price discrimination. By removing price differences that are not motivated by differences in payoffs or underlying risk characteristics, arbitrage eliminates the potential for rents in the economy. In summary, financial intermediation – if well-designed and properly administered – has the capacity to allocate financial funds more efficiently in the economy. By doing so, it has the power to raise the level of savings and investment. This is not just theory. A growing body of empirical evidence using very different methodologies and datasets for various countries has established that finance – and by finance I mean both banks and markets – can exert a positive influence on capital accumulation and economic growth. [7] The findings also suggest that there is no institutional structure – the mix between banks and markets – that is optimal for fostering growth. What matters is that people have access to financial instruments; the exact type and composition is of secondary importance. Let me now turn to the darker side of finance. Robert Merton – one of the architects of modern financial theory – once said: “Any virtue can readily become a vice if taken to excess, and just so with innovations”. [8] When – and how – can finance turn into a source of instability and economic regress? My answer is simple. When function 2 is ignored, and functions 3, 4 and 5 are abused. In other words, when screening and monitoring services are neglected, and when risk management, liquidity transformation and price discovery are flawed. There is unlikely to be a better case study of the functional degradation of finance than the events that led up to the crisis that started in 2007. I am convinced that if banks neglect their primary activity of due diligence, and if they come to abuse risk control techniques, liquidity creation and arbitrage opportunities, finance will do more harm than good to the economy. And crises of the magnitude that we have witnessed become unavoidable. This is not to say that financial markets are solely to blame for the financial crisis. Policy-makers, regulators and supervisors also bear some responsibility for the incidents that led to the most severe financial crisis since the Great Depression. But understanding the impact of the paradigm shift of private finance in recent years demands a deep introspection into the inner mechanisms of financial economics. Let me recall the essence of the screening duty of banks. Banks acquire and evaluate information about potential borrowers. At the heart of this duty is a thorough due diligence at the start of the contract and continual monitoring of the creditworthiness of the borrower and the quality of investment, as the project progresses. A precondition for due diligence and monitoring is that the creditor-borrower relationship is continued. Securitisation of loans made loan discontinuation possible. The bank would extend a loan but immediately pool it together with loans of similar scope and characteristics, so that the idiosyncratic risk inherent in each individual contract would find compensation in the idiosyncratic risk of other contracts. The law of large numbers would take care of cross-loan return compensation within the pool. So, the return to the pool would be less risky and more predictable than the return to any of its constituent components. In fact, the pool would turn a heterogeneous collection of assets into a standardised financial object that could be placed in the market. The traditional banking model, in which banks would issue loans and hold them until they are repaid, was replaced by “ originate and distribute”. In this new model, banks would not hold the loans they originated. They would pass the loans onto other financial investors by slicing and repackaging the claims attached to them. In other words, by securitising the loans. The prevalence of this model led to significant growth in the market for structured finance in the United States and, to a lesser extent, in Europe. For instance, the volume of residential mortgage-backed securities issued in the United States was around EUR 200 billion in 2006. [9] Ten years before, this kind of security hardly existed. Sub-prime lending, which was the outgrowth of securitisation, is not bad per se. It extends credit to people who, for various reasons would otherwise be denied credit. But by definition, sub-prime loans are inherently riskier for lenders as the probability of delinquency is inversely related to the creditworthiness of the borrower. But delinquency risk is less of a concern if there is an expectation that the loan can be readily sold off and somebody else will have to face the consequence of non-performance. This expectation was a powerful trigger of sub-prime loan growth. Sub-prime mortgage lending in the United States grew from USD 33 billion in 1993 to around USD 700 billion in 2006, the year preceding the beginning of the crisis [10], when nearly one in four US mortgages was sub-prime. At the same time, these borrowers were responsible for around 50% of all US foreclosures. These numbers provide a good idea about the quantum of risk that was inherent in the balance sheets of the US financial system.Fatally, securitisation had lessened lenders’ incentives for prudent screening and steady monitoring. A recent study finds that the opportunity to securitise sub-prime mortgages reduces the incentives for financial intermediaries to carefully screen and monitor borrowers. [11] The intuition is straightforward. If banks are allowed to put the large risk that a sub-prime mortgage loan poses off-balance sheet by securitising it, they will concentrate their business efforts in expanding the originations. This seems consistent with the facts. After all, the share of securitised sub-prime mortgages in the US reached 75% in 2006, up from 54% in 2001. [12] Hence, only a small share of sub-prime mortgages remained on the balance sheet of the originating institution. Conducting a fully-fledged risk analysis requires full information. The ultimate investors in securitised loans could in principle have exercised the due diligence that banks were no longer providing. But risk management was difficult, paradoxically, because information became unavailable to investors. It was buried in financial structures that were not transparent. Paradoxically, securitisation – a new technique to control risk – had made risk control practically impossible. The “originate and distribute” business strategy had turned risk into a commodity. Risk could be bundled, sliced and re-bundled for further sale. Securitisation and financial derivatives were the vehicles through which risk became marketable, passed between participants, spread across the system and – in this way – it became difficult to localise and quantify. Individually, diversified strategies all looked like rational attempts to unload risk to those parties in the system that were more willing and able to bear it. In the aggregate, however, strategies all looked alike! Viewed across the system, diversification was subject to a fallacy of composition. Individual strategies were diversified. But the aggregation of a complex web of identical strategies – all designed to shed risk individually – generated a lack of diversity for the financial system as a whole. In the end, it turned out that the system could not diversify risk away. Through the use of short-term repurchase agreements banks increasingly financed their longer-term asset holdings with shorter maturity market instruments. Off-balance sheet structured investment vehicles (SIVs) became popular as a result of wholesale financing. Rather than relying on deposits from private savers, as was the norm in the traditional banking model, the banking system started to borrow funds off-balance sheet in the money market by selling short-term commercial papers and engaging in repurchase agreements. This shift in funding was a by-product of securitisation as much as a source of its potentially unlimited expansion.This self-referential circuit of finance – where asset acquisition created funding needs and funding mechanisms expanded asset acquisition even further – is evident in the data. The share of total investment bank assets that were financed by overnight repurchase agreements roughly doubled from 2000 to 2007. [13] While deposits provide a rather stable and dependable source of funding for financing longer-term investments, the market for commercial papers and repurchase agreements can be prone to sudden shifts in confidence. Indeed, in the summer of 2007, with investors pulling back from asset-backed securities, banks saw the value of their assets and hence their capital base declining dramatically.In the end, the social costs of negligence and abuse were devastating. Even more so, because finance had expanded at an unsustainable pace in the years leading up to the 2007/2008 crisis. A number of economies had come to pin their national fortunes on a sector that is potentially very profitable, but also ruinously risky.The financial industry has grown substantially during the past three decades. In 1977 the share of financial intermediation in total US gross value added was around 5%. In 2007 this share was over 8%. It was also a highly profitable business for years. Financial sector compensation as a share of total US compensation doubled during the last thirty years. In the euro area this share rose by roughly 25%. High earnings attracted many bright young people into the industry. Although the total number of employees in the financial sector remained relatively stable, higher than average wages in the finance industry led to a diversion of highly-skilled individuals from the real economy to the financial sector. [14] For instance, in 2006 a financial industry employee earned 35% more than an engineer with a similar level of education. These numbers speak a clear language. Financial creativity had its price. Banks increased their demand for highly-skilled talents, bidding up the market clearing wage in this industry. Whether or not financial employees have been overcompensated is a difficult question. But they have certainly been given the wrong incentives. A less difficult question is whether talent was always and everywhere employed in a productive way. Here my answer is no. Many financial instruments were not invented to finance the ownership of additional homes, to finance productive investments or education or to help firms hedge the uncertainties of currency or interest rate risk. Some of these instruments were invented to generate fees without creating social value. Looking ahead, what can be done to ensure that financial institutions return to the path of virtue? The extent of the financial crisis leaves no doubt that tighter regulations and supervision are required to overhaul the financial system. But a fine line needs to be drawn between ensuring financial efficiency – and financial innovation is an important ingredient of efficiency – and financial stability. Excessive, ill-designed regulation may counteract our intentions. To improve the resilience of the financial system we need first to identify the sources of instability and fragility. Not all financial institutions have been equally involved in developments that led to the 2007/2008 financial crisis. It seems that the current predicament originated mainly in institutions that had moved away from traditional retail banking, from institutions that increasingly relied on non-interest income and non-deposit-funding. [15] These insights should serve as a starting point for shaping the contours of the post-crisis financial system. Reforms should be designed in a way that ensures that those segments of finance, which remain faithful to the mission of providing functional services to the real economy, are not put at an economic disadvantage. Profit maximisation sets the incentives in a market economy to achieve first-best outcomes. But just as employers bear a social responsibility for their employees, banks bear a social responsibility for savers and for society as a whole. Reforms must be targeted at internalising this social responsibility in business strategies so that what is collectively optimal is selected by profit-maximising business units. I see three elements at the core of efforts to reform the international financial system:The first ingredient is a mechanism that enforces transparency in financial structures. This is essential for the financial industry to return to its prime mission of assessing the quality of investment. The trend towards more sophisticated financial instruments has not been matched by increasing disclosure requirements. Sellers of securitised products must disclose all information about the underlying loan structure so that both investors and rating agencies can correctly price the risks embedded in these products. More transparency can also be achieved by central counterparty clearing of bilateral over-the-counter trading arrangements. Second, the progressive mutation of arbitrage into speculation needs to be reversed. Financial players that take large speculative positions in certain segments of the market can exert a non-negligible bearing on the future pricing of an asset or bond by affecting market sentiment. Current market structures can aggravate this effect. For instance, investors are currently allowed to buy credit defaults swaps without holding the underlying asset, typically a bond. By first buying the credit default swaps and then trying to affect market sentiment by going short on the underlying bond, investors can make large profits without a change in the fundamental value of the reference entity and, worse, to its detriment.Third, credit and liquidity risk management should not become a force of pro-cyclicality for the financial system as a whole. Limited liability in economic contracts introduces an asymmetry that is potentially fatal in the financial sphere. Owners and managers of financial companies are given a distinct incentive to expand risk-taking in anticipation of high returns (if there is a favourable pay-off), while remaining confident of a limited loss in the event of failure. The perception that public authorities will always socialise the costs of financial crisis reinforces private investors’ expectation that they will harvest more of the upside and shift more of the downside. Regulation should attempt to limit the risks banks assume by imposing higher, countercyclical capital requirements, thus limiting leverage. Financial institutions will be asked to raise the quality and quantity of their capital base to ensure they have adequate funding in place as a buffer against future market disruptions. A correction of compensation practices for financial employees is also warranted. Compensation should put emphasis on rewarding longer-term business performance. These objectives are currently examined within the framework of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. Implementing these measures will lead the return to a more sustainable, longer-term business model for banks. At the global level, the G20 and the Financial Stability Board have become the main forum for international cooperation on these reforms. Complemented by macroprudential supervision that takes due account of the interconnectedness of financial institutions and systemic risk, these reforms will pave the way for lower market volatility and hence greater financial stability. A courageous overhaul of the financial system will also help to bridge the rising gap that has emerged between the financial sector and the real economy. We cannot afford financial activities that neglect the interest of the real economy. Indeed, the financial industry and the real economy must share a common goal. Only united will they contribute to strong, sustainable and balanced growth and to future economic prosperity. Thank you for your attention. Allen, F. and D. Gale (1997), “Financial Markets, Intermediaries, and Intertemporal Smoothing”, Journal of Political Economy, 105: 523-546.Beltratti, A. and R. M. Stulz (2009), “Why Did Some Banks Perform Better During the Credit Crisis? A Cross-Country Study of the Impact of Governance and Regulation”, Charles A. Dice Center Working Paper No 2009-12, July.Brunnermeier, M. (2009), “Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-08”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(1), 77-100. Diamond, D. W. and R. E. Verrecchia (1982), ""Optimal Managerial Contracts and Equilibrium Security Prices”, Journal of Finance, 37: 275-287.Hicks, J. (1969), “A Theory of Economic History”, Oxford: Clarendon Press.Hudson, P. (2002), “The Genesis of Industrial Capital: A Study of the West Riding Wool Textile Industry”, Cambridge University Press.Jensen, M. and K. Murphy (1990), “Performance Pay and Top Management Incentives ”, Journal of Political Economy, 98: 225-263.Keys, B., T. K. Mukherjee, A. Seru, and V. Vig (2010), ""Did Securitization Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Sub-prime Loans"", Quarterly Journal of Economics. Levine, R. (2005), “Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence”, in: Aghion, P. and Durlauf, S. (ed.), Handbook of Economic Growth, edition 1, volume 1, chapter 12, pages 865-934. Merton, R. C. (1992), ""Financial Innovation and Economic Performance ”, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 4: 12-22.Philippon, T. and A. Reshef (2009), “Wages and human capital in the US financial industry: 1909-2006”, NBER working paper 14644.Robinson, J. (1952), “The Rate of Interest and Other Essays”, chapter ‘The Generalization of The General Theory’. MacMillan.Schumpeter, J. A. (1934), “The Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry into Profits, Capital, Credit, Interest and the Business Cycle”, Harvard University Press.Sirri, E. R. and P. Tufano (1995), “The Economics of Pooling”, in Crane, D. B. et al (eds.), “The Global Financial System: A Functional Approach”, Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press: 81-128.Pollins, H. (1954), “The Marketing of Railway Shares in the First Half of the Nineteenth Century”, The Economic History Review, 7(2):230–9.[1]For a similar classification of functions see Levine (2005). [2]See Pollins (1954) or Hudson (2002). [3]See Hicks (1969). [4]See e.g. Sirri and Tufano (1995). [5]See e.g. Diamond and Verrecchia (1982) or Jensen and Murphy (1990) for an empirical examination. [6]See Levine (2005). [7]See Levine (2005) for a brilliant summary of the literature. [8]See Merton (1992). [9]Source: Dealogic/DCM Analytics. Original USD amounts converted into euro. [10]Data sources are: Center for Responsible Lending, Inside Mortgage Finance and Mortgage Bankers Association (MBA). Data for foreclosures refer to the sum of sub-prime AMR and FMR. [11]Keys et al (2010). [12]Source: Mortgage Market Statistical Annual (2007). [13]See Brunnermeier (2009). [14]See Philippon and Reshef (2009). [15]See Beltratti and Stulz (2009). Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen would like thank universidad nova warm kind invit opportun deliv lectur chosen titl role financ past three year taught us import reflect question chosen univers lectur believ univers research young peopl educ make vital contribut rethink role financ societi financ touch virtual everi sphere human endeavour individu household corpor govern crisi pose provoc question mani peopl would like answer extent societi need financ recent econom histori answer alway depend circumst time affluenc financ make lender borrow alik rich respect answer resound posit contrast time econom regress disillusion market suggest embitt public financi kind shortterm specul motiv greed tri bring timeless perspect vacil public attitud toward financ anticip line reason think minimum crisi beli longstand convict macroeconom enterpris lead financ follow contrari joan robinson dictum think financi structur part deep textur economi relev trend growth shape busi cycl around trend side schumpet wrote banker stand wish form new combin possessor product mean ephor overs exchang economi time contrast joan robinson view financ veil see financi structur prime sourc aggreg uncertainti econom relev shock origin market lend borrow incalcul cannot measur normal time difficult quantifi even time crisi know larg societi afford let financ sever tie real economi yet past two decad financi player gradual expand activ beyond schumpet idea intermedi saver investor financi sector gradual quiet decoupl least part real economi financi innov trade book increas seen profit busi line extend loan busi credit default swap assetback secur collateralis debt oblig illustr exampl chang focus remark today discuss quiet shift paradigm financ explor financ creat econom valu time harm good conclud propos way forward way discourag busi model orient short term promot healthi financi innov ensur longterm financi stabil let start provoc question extent societi need financ beyond sanctif financ boom bankerbash crise societi need financ societi need financ five key reason give econom valu financi intermedi first extern financ reduc need selffin selffin constrain invest second financ provid screen monitor servic help societi evalu rank invest project third financ facilit manag diversif risk otherwis entrepreneur would find mani sourc risk unbear fourth financ promot transform liquid saver place high valu liquid investor need opportun invest longterm fifth financ facilit process price discoveri first function provis extern fund appar econom industri revolut drove industri revolut england th centuri true day initi outlay set busi relat modest product facil small machineri cheap retain earn craftsmanship famili equiti loan relat friend domin form financ true inflect point econom fortun nation point pattern growth turn definit upward come heavi capit invest could lengthen life product cycl steadi rise wealth nation requir larg inject capit without access credit larg upfront payment product resourc simpli would possibl without credit product process constrain econom ineffici scale opportun borrow futur incom stream reduc constraint abil entrepreneur invest bigger machin larger premis today access extern fund less import potenti spur econom innov allow product facil oper effici stand credit line access credit import busi student receiv loan expect higher incom like earn later live student loan permit enjoy benefit higher educ time life incom low credit make promis project possibl whether embodi physic capit better educ provis screen monitor servic second key function financ specialis screen qualiti borrow effect remedi problem advers select credit market financi intermediari acquir process evalu inform potenti borrow help reduc larg cost individu would face lend save intermedi likewis bank effect monitor behaviour borrow fund alloc therebi reduc cost associ moral hazard situat asymmetr inform lead borrow take action erod valu loan stock market also perform duti influenti research literatur claim liquid stock market help foster corpor govern henc reduc moral hazard basic intuit straightforward manageri compens direct link stock market perform either contract stock ownership manag incent select implement action increas sharehold wealth transform manag risk third key function financi institut modern societi becam focus attent recent financi crisi turn dark side function later let stress potenti valu risk manag financi market provid saver larg array instrument allow diversifi risk associ invest along two broad dimens across firm industri nation time financi market also allow entrepreneur manag risk sourc movement interest rate currenc financi institut abl hedg anoth type risk liquid risk liquid transform fourth function list help control liquid risk aggreg economi individu general express high prefer liquid anticip uncertain futur disburs tendenc lender side larg share save held cash shortterm debt instrument borrow howev typic requir loan long matur potenti lucrat project defer econom payoff see emerg tradeoff social valu longterm invest privat valu liquid financi intermediari particular depositori institut reconcil tradeoff engag matur transform make possibl sociallyvalu longterm project fund privatelydesir liquid likewis welldevelop equiti market constitut perman sourc fund compani saver abl quick easili convert share back cash final key function financ price discoveri textbook financi market asset price averag reflect econom relev inform market forc move trade system close ideal price correct given current state knowledg arbitrag simultan purchas sale asset two differ market advantag differ price engag arbitrag financi player elimin price discrimin remov price differ motiv differ payoff under risk characterist arbitrag elimin potenti rent economi summari financi intermedi welldesign proper administ capac alloc financi fund effici economi power rais level save invest theori grow bodi empir evid use differ methodolog dataset various countri establish financ financ mean bank market exert posit influenc capit accumul econom growth find also suggest institut structur mix bank market optim foster growth matter peopl access financi instrument exact type composit secondari import let turn darker side financ robert merton one architect modern financi theori said virtu readili becom vice taken excess innov financ turn sourc instabl econom regress answer simpl function ignor function abus word screen monitor servic neglect risk manag liquid transform price discoveri flaw unlik better case studi function degrad financ event led crisi start convinc bank neglect primari activ due dilig come abus risk control techniqu liquid creation arbitrag opportun financ harm good economi crise magnitud wit becom unavoid say financi market sole blame financi crisi policymak regul supervisor also bear respons incid led sever financi crisi sinc great depress understand impact paradigm shift privat financ recent year demand deep introspect inner mechan financi econom let recal essenc screen duti bank bank acquir evalu inform potenti borrow heart duti thorough due dilig start contract continu monitor creditworthi borrow qualiti invest project progress precondit due dilig monitor creditorborrow relationship continu securitis loan made loan discontinu possibl bank would extend loan immedi pool togeth loan similar scope characterist idiosyncrat risk inher individu contract would find compens idiosyncrat risk contract law larg number would take care crossloan return compens within pool return pool would less riski predict return constitu compon fact pool would turn heterogen collect asset standardis financi object could place market tradit bank model bank would issu loan hold repaid replac origin distribut new model bank would hold loan origin would pass loan onto financi investor slice repackag claim attach word securitis loan preval model led signific growth market structur financ unit state lesser extent europ instanc volum residenti mortgageback secur issu unit state around eur billion ten year kind secur hard exist subprim lend outgrowth securitis bad per se extend credit peopl various reason would otherwis deni credit definit subprim loan inher riskier lender probabl delinqu invers relat creditworthi borrow delinqu risk less concern expect loan readili sold somebodi els face consequ nonperform expect power trigger subprim loan growth subprim mortgag lend unit state grew usd billion around usd billion year preced begin crisi near one four us mortgag subprim time borrow respons around us foreclosur number provid good idea quantum risk inher balanc sheet us financi system fatal securitis lessen lender incent prudent screen steadi monitor recent studi find opportun securitis subprim mortgag reduc incent financi intermediari care screen monitor borrow intuit straightforward bank allow put larg risk subprim mortgag loan pose offbal sheet securitis concentr busi effort expand origin seem consist fact share securitis subprim mortgag us reach henc small share subprim mortgag remain balanc sheet origin institut conduct fullyfledg risk analysi requir full inform ultim investor securitis loan could principl exercis due dilig bank longer provid risk manag difficult paradox inform becam unavail investor buri financi structur transpar paradox securitis new techniqu control risk made risk control practic imposs origin distribut busi strategi turn risk commod risk could bundl slice rebundl sale securitis financi deriv vehicl risk becam market pass particip spread across system way becam difficult localis quantifi individu diversifi strategi look like ration attempt unload risk parti system will abl bear aggreg howev strategi look alik view across system diversif subject fallaci composit individu strategi diversifi aggreg complex web ident strategi design shed risk individu generat lack divers financi system whole end turn system could diversifi risk away use shortterm repurchas agreement bank increas financ longerterm asset hold shorter matur market instrument offbal sheet structur invest vehicl siv becam popular result wholesal financ rather reli deposit privat saver norm tradit bank model bank system start borrow fund offbal sheet money market sell shortterm commerci paper engag repurchas agreement shift fund byproduct securitis much sourc potenti unlimit expans selfreferenti circuit financ asset acquisit creat fund need fund mechan expand asset acquisit even evid data share total invest bank asset financ overnight repurchas agreement rough doubl deposit provid rather stabl depend sourc fund financ longerterm invest market commerci paper repurchas agreement prone sudden shift confid inde summer investor pull back assetback secur bank saw valu asset henc capit base declin dramat end social cost neglig abus devast even financ expand unsustain pace year lead crisi number economi come pin nation fortun sector potenti profit also ruinous riski financi industri grown substanti past three decad share financi intermedi total us gross valu ad around share also high profit busi year financi sector compens share total us compens doubl last thirti year euro area share rose rough high earn attract mani bright young peopl industri although total number employe financi sector remain relat stabl higher averag wage financ industri led divers highlyskil individu real economi financi sector instanc financi industri employe earn engin similar level educ number speak clear languag financi creativ price bank increas demand highlyskil talent bid market clear wage industri whether financi employe overcompens difficult question certain given wrong incent less difficult question whether talent alway everywher employ product way answer mani financi instrument invent financ ownership addit home financ product invest educ help firm hedg uncertainti currenc interest rate risk instrument invent generat fee without creat social valu look ahead done ensur financi institut return path virtu extent financi crisi leav doubt tighter regul supervis requir overhaul financi system fine line need drawn ensur financi effici financi innov import ingredi effici financi stabil excess illdesign regul may counteract intent improv resili financi system need first identifi sourc instabl fragil financi institut equal involv develop led financi crisi seem current predica origin main institut move away tradit retail bank institut increas reli noninterest incom nondepositfund insight serv start point shape contour postcrisi financi system reform design way ensur segment financ remain faith mission provid function servic real economi put econom disadvantag profit maximis set incent market economi achiev firstbest outcom employ bear social respons employe bank bear social respons saver societi whole reform must target internalis social respons busi strategi collect optim select profitmaximis busi unit see three element core effort reform intern financi system first ingredi mechan enforc transpar financi structur essenti financi industri return prime mission assess qualiti invest trend toward sophist financi instrument match increas disclosur requir seller securitis product must disclos inform under loan structur investor rate agenc correct price risk embed product transpar also achiev central counterparti clear bilater overthecount trade arrang second progress mutat arbitrag specul need revers financi player take larg specul posit certain segment market exert nonneglig bear futur price asset bond affect market sentiment current market structur aggrav effect instanc investor current allow buy credit default swap without hold under asset typic bond first buy credit default swap tri affect market sentiment go short under bond investor make larg profit without chang fundament valu refer entiti wors detriment third credit liquid risk manag becom forc procycl financi system whole limit liabil econom contract introduc asymmetri potenti fatal financi sphere owner manag financi compani given distinct incent expand risktak anticip high return favour payoff remain confid limit loss event failur percept public author alway socialis cost financi crisi reinforc privat investor expect harvest upsid shift downsid regul attempt limit risk bank assum impos higher countercycl capit requir thus limit leverag financi institut ask rais qualiti quantiti capit base ensur adequ fund place buffer futur market disrupt correct compens practic financi employe also warrant compens put emphasi reward longerterm busi perform object current examin within framework basel committe bank supervis implement measur lead return sustain longerterm busi model bank global level g financi stabil board becom main forum intern cooper reform complement macroprudenti supervis take due account interconnected financi institut system risk reform pave way lower market volatil henc greater financi stabil courag overhaul financi system also help bridg rise gap emerg financi sector real economi cannot afford financi activ neglect interest real economi inde financi industri real economi must share common goal unit contribut strong sustain balanc growth futur econom prosper thank attent allen f d gale financi market intermediari intertempor smooth journal polit economi beltratti r m stulz bank perform better credit crisi crosscountri studi impact govern regul charl dice center work paper juli brunnermei m deciph liquid credit crunch journal econom perspect diamond d w r e verrecchia optim manageri contract equilibrium secur price journal financ hick j theori econom histori oxford clarendon press hudson p genesi industri capit studi west ride wool textil industri cambridg univers press jensen m k murphi perform pay top manag incent journal polit economi key b k mukherje seru v vig securit lead lax screen evid subprim loan quarter journal econom levin r financ growth theori evid aghion p durlauf ed handbook econom growth edit volum chapter page merton r c financi innov econom perform journal appli corpor financ philippon reshef wage human capit us financi industri nber work paper robinson j rate interest essay chapter general general theori macmillan schumpet j theori econom develop inquiri profit capit credit interest busi cycl harvard univers press sirri e r p tufano econom pool crane d b et al ed global financi system function approach boston ma harvard busi school press pollin h market railway share first half nineteenth centuri econom histori review similar classif function see levin see pollin hudson see hick see e g sirri tufano see e g diamond verrecchia jensen murphi empir examin see levin see levin brilliant summari literatur see merton sourc dealogicdcm analyt origin usd amount convert euro data sourc center respons lend insid mortgag financ mortgag banker associ mba data foreclosur refer sum subprim amr fmr key et al sourc mortgag market statist annual see brunnermei see philippon reshef see beltratti stulz reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en