Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The role of retail finance for financial markets efficiency and stability,20-10-2008,European Central Bank,ECB,2798,"<p>It is for me a real pleasure to speak here in Prague at the European Central Bank and Centre of Financial Studies Research Network conference. I would like to thank the organizers of the conference for compiling a very interesting and stimulating program. My special thanks go to our host, the Czech National Bank, for the very good cooperation and for an outstanding local organization of this conference.Being here in Prague, I was reminded that Joseph Schumpeter was born not too far away from Prague in a small town named Třešť. It was Joseph Schumpeter who once said that “economic progress in capitalist society means turmoil”. It would be, of course, unfair and undue reference to associate Schumpeter’s notion of turmoil with the current period we are experiencing in financial markets. In my speech today, I would like to focus on the retail banking sectors’ contribution to efficiency and stability in financial markets also in light of the ongoing financial market turbulences. I will also stress the importance of retail payment infrastructures, and particularly the issue of harmonisation and integration as it underlies the Single Euro Payment Area (SEPA) project as a fundamental basis for the efficiency and stability of the European retail finance market. Retail banking is the backbone of banking activities. Retail sector banks, in particular, have the expertise to provide credit to small and medium-sized enterprises (or SMEs) and to evaluate the associated risks. As SMEs are the main engines of job creation and economic growth, they are also important drivers of innovation in the economy. Therefore, an efficient and stable retail banking business is needed for the financing of SME activities. As these firms do not have access to global capital markets, they are heavily dependent on banks for their funding. This is particularly true for European SMEs, as the European market for venture capital remains very small compared to the one in the US. The availability of bank credit is, thus, crucial for sustained investment of firms and, therefore, plays an important role for economic development and growth. For the retail banking market to be as innovative and efficient as possible, market integration of the retail banking sector is key. It is crucial that borrowers and depositors are charged similar fees and costs for similar banking services across the euro area. However, most indicators of retail banking integration suggest that there is still significant room for closer integration. For instance, the dispersion of lending rates charged by banks to households and non-financial corporations has remained relatively high across countries. Also quantity indicators of banking integration - while suggesting that banking market integration was boosted by the introduction of the euro - remain at relatively low levels. [1] The low levels of integration can generally be attributed to differences in the national economies, institutional factors and financial structures. These factors include differences in credit risk and pricing models, differences in taxation and regulation but also the relatively high level of fragmentation of retail infrastructures. Therefore, more efforts with respect to integration of the retail banking sector are needed. Not least, since, first, a more efficient and integrated retail banking sector would lead to a better allocation of credit to innovative and growing companies, and second, from a macroeconomic perspective would contribute to both fostering economic growth and strengthening of the transmission of changes in official interest rates to the economy and, thereby, enhancing the effectiveness of monetary policy. At the same time, the recent turbulences in financial markets remind us that any further integration process has to be guided by appropriate provisions to safeguard financial stability. - SLIDE 2 -Over the past decade there has been a significant transformation in banks’ business models, away from the traditional model based mainly on retail deposits towards a more market-based funding model. The significant recourse to specific funding instruments, such as mortgage bonds and securitisation, have made banks increasingly more dependant on money and capital markets, but at the same time, of course, less dependent on their opportunities to expand customer basis for funding. Although customer deposits still constitute the largest part of banks funding base, their share as a percentage of total assets of the euro area banking sector has been declining. This is shown in Chart A. - SLIDE 3 - In the last ten years the access to market-based funding and wholesale deposits have allowed banks to raise large amounts of funding at relatively low costs in order to finance the provision of new loans. To the extent that more stable retail deposit financing has been replaced by short-term wholesale funding, banks may have become more exposed to interest rate and liquidity risks. More recently, with the financial market turmoil the shortcomings of this increasing dependence on financial markets has become apparent.The increased diversification of banks’ income sources via higher brokerage fees and commissions – what is more generically called “non-interest income” is another structural trend in banks' changing business models. The diversification of income provides banks with additional sources of income - empirical studies concerning the effects of income diversification on profitability tend to conclude that there has been a positive correlation between non-interest income and profitability - and allows banks in principle to reap the benefits of diversification. Literature concerning the impact of diversification in the sources of revenues on the volatility of banks' earnings point out that there has been some stabilisation effect of income diversification on profits, due to the negative correlation between non-interest income and interest income, but that non-interest income has been more volatile than interest income. However, an important aspect relates to the potential impact on financial stability. Recent literature investigating income diversification effects on financial stability conclude that in general income diversification tended to increase systemic risk. [2] Indeed, even though income diversification tends to increase profits, and that strong and profitable banks are better able to absorb losses and thus strengthen financial stability, this strategy at the same time can increase financial stability risks as the increasing reliance on non-interest income sources entails a higher exposure of banks to the major global risks, and in particular those related to capital markets. Also, diversification implies that institutions become increasingly involved in similar sets of activity; in this case, it becomes more likely that whenever an institution faces difficulties, others do as well. This increased interdependence might propagate, and, possibly, amplify shocks at a systemic level.Once again the current financial market turmoil has revealed the weaknesses underlying this change in the business model. - SLIDE 4 - An extreme example of high dependence on non-interest income would be the case of the US investment banking houses. Chart B shows that US investment banks are also typically more profitable than commercial banks but also shows that their earnings are more volatile than those of commercial banks. The large European universal banks are, in terms of profits, somewhat in the middle between commercial and investment banking. This is more or less expected given their broader business model nature combining both retail and investment banks activities. The drop in profits from 2006 to 2007 experienced by investment banks was much more pronounced than for commercial banks, Chart C. [3]- SLIDE 5 - - SLIDE 6 -The financial turmoil has starkly illustrated that market-based funding is heavily dependent on market perception, including trust and confidence. Deposit funding has proven to be more stable during the ongoing financial market turmoil than other sources of banks’ funding. While there are of course other factors at play Chart D shows that during the ongoing turbulences the market has valued more positively those institutions with more funding via customers’ deposits. Related to this, the recent events illustrate the benefits long-term relationships of banks with depositors and borrowers. As mentioned before, the financial turmoil has also illustrated possible implications of banks’ changing business model for financial stability. Let me emphasise that, in principle, market funding and in particular securitisation can provide significant benefits in terms of risk sharing and diversification. However, the recent crisis has highlighted some features of those markets which can strongly impair the orderly functioning of markets. [4] For ensuring an orderly functioning of the market, transparency is crucial. Banks need to properly evaluate and disclose risks and use proper valuation techniques. For this we need “good” regulation. A regulation that gives the right incentives to contain risks, but also regulation that is flexible enough to adapt to innovations in financial markets, allowing financial innovations that help to enlarge the capacities for investment and growth and the diversification of risks in the market.The importance of retail banking is likely to revive against the background of the ongoing turmoil. Efficiency and competition in that sector is certainly of high importance. Nonetheless, to ensure a smooth functioning of the retail banking market, we need to have “good” regulation and stable infrastructures in place, which brings me to the second part of my speech on the role of retail infrastructures. - SLIDE 7 -The realization of the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) is important for two reasons. First, it will contribute to creating a competitive and integrated European retail payment market and thereby fostering innovation and growth in the retail banking sector. And second, at the same time SEPA will contribute to a smooth and safe underlying payment infrastructure which will provide the basis for stable transactions on a retail banking level, contributing to safeguarding financial stability. With SEPA individuals and corporates are able to make their cashless payments throughout the euro area from a single payment account anywhere in the euro area using a single set of payment instruments as easily, efficiently and safely as they can make them today at the national level. - SLIDE 8 -Especially, at a time when other sources of income for banks are more volatile, payment services will contribute to banks’ business as banks can count on reliable and regular revenues generated through payment services. Payment services are an important part of the banking industry, accounting for more than a third of the operational costs of banks, and around 25% of their revenues. This is also reflected in the fact that according to the latest figures, non-cash payment transactions of European countries grew on average at an annual rate of 7% in the past six years stemming from ongoing modernisation of payment means and systems. [5] Moreover, payment services are also important in helping banks to establish long-term relationships with their customers, private individuals as well as corporations. From an economic perspective, efficient and safe payment systems are important in facilitating real and financial transactions in advanced economies.The Eurosystem continues to support the creation of the SEPA, in which it plays an active role as a catalyst and offers a platform for debate among the various stakeholders regarding the advantages of a fully integrated market for retail payment services.- SLIDE 9 -SEPA makes an important contribution towards a more integrated payments market in Europe, which will foster financial market efficiency and bring substantial economic benefits to society.As it was also shown today at this conference, SEPA offers an enormous potential to banks, non-banks, corporations, and consumers, and society as a whole. Also a recent ECB study concludes that banks may significantly reduce their costs, but will face increased competition putting downward pressure on prices and revenues. [6] Already today, prices for payment services have gone down in a number of euro area countries. SEPA will also offer market participants an opportunity to market new, value-added services related to the payment chain. Further empirical evidence supports the view that harmonisation and standardisation of retail payments processing across the euro area are likely to create economies of scale in the provision of payment services in Europe. Significant cost efficiency gains can be expected from continued consolidation across borders. [7]Overall, SEPA will bring greater standardisation and harmonisation in the retail payments market thereby promoting competition, and innovation. At the same time, SEPA plays a crucial role for fostering efficiency and stability in the retail banking sector.- SLIDE 10 -A major milestone in the direction of greater harmonization was the launch of SEPA Credit Transfer in January 2008. Preparations for the SEPA Direct Debit (SDD) have progressed well and the SDD launch is scheduled for 1st of November 2009. Work is also ongoing on e-payments and mobile payment channels, as well as on improvements to the SEPA Credit Transfer.In a time in which banks are under stress, it might be tempting to slow down the process of modernisation and innovation of payment services. But the opposite is needed. The new SEPA standards need to be implemented and the old ones should phase out. We need to set an end date for the final realization of new products and processes and find clarity on the pricing of services. This is easier said than done and requires the efforts from all stakeholders: banks, customers and public authorities. More initiative is needed and much more work remains to be done to complete the SEPA project. SEPA can play a crucial role for fostering efficiency and stability in the retail banking sector. To conclude my remarks, retail banking has proven to be an area of stability within the banking business during the recent months in credit markets. It plays a crucial role allowing savings to flow efficiently to borrowers via credit. “Credit” comes from the Latin word “credere”, which means “to believe”. This symbolizes that trust is a crucial prerequisite for the functioning of credit markets at a retail banking level as well. If this trust is disappointed uncertainty can soar with serious consequences for the functioning of financial markets. Therefore, trust can only stem from good and transparent business practises, sound business models of banks and robust and stable retail banking infrastructures. SEPA can make an important contribution in that respect. It provides a single Euro integrated retail payments infrastructure that contributes to efficient but at the same time stable financial markets at the retail level. Authorities as well as the private sector need to strive for further progress in the field of payment infrastructures not to loose the momentum in creating an integrated and harmonised retail market in Europe.  This conference offers a good opportunity to discuss recent advances in the field of retail banking it provides an important contribution to better understand developments in retail banking. I wish all of us continued stimulating presentations and fruitful discussions. Finally, let me stress that I see retail payments as promising avenues for future research. It is only recently that retail payment issues have received greater priority on the academic agenda with efforts being made to analyse essential elements and the evolving dynamics of the retail payments industry. Against this background, let me draw your attention that the European Central Bank and De Nederlandsche Bank will be hosting a conference entitled “Retail payments: integration and innovation” on 25-26 May 2009. With this conference, I anticipate two days of interesting discussions on highly topical and relevant issues relating to retail payments. Maybe we will meet each other again next year in Frankfurt.Ashcraft, A. and Schuermann, T. (2008), “Understanding the Securitization of Subprime Mortgage Credit”, Federal Reserve Bank New York Staff Report 318.Bolt, W. and Chakravorti (2008), “Consumer Choice and Merchant Acceptance of Payment Media”, mimeo.Capgemini/Royal Bank of Scottland/European Financial Management & Market Association (2008), “World Payments Report 2008”.Beijnen, Ch. and W. Bolt (2007), “Size Matters: Economies of Scale in European Payment Processing”, DNB Working Paper, No. 155/November 2007.Dell’Ariccia, G., Igan, D. and Laeven, L. (2008), “Credit Booms and Lending Standards: Evidence from the Subprime Mortgage Market”, International Monetary Fund Working Paper 106.ECB (2008), Financial Integration Report.European Commission (2008), “SEPA: Potential Benefits at Stake – Researching the impact of SEPA on the Payments Market and its Stakeholders”, Capgemini Consulting.Financial Stability Forum (2008). “Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience”, March.Hirtle, B. J., and Stiroh, K.J. (2007), “The Return to Retail and the Performance of U.S. Banks”, Journal of Banking and Finance, 31, 1101-1133Jonker, N. and A. Kosse (2008), “Towards a European Payments Market: Survey Results on Cross-Border Payment Behaviour of Dutch Consumers”, DNB Occasional Studies, Vol. 6/No 1 (2008).Kemppainen, K. (2008), “Integrating European Retail Payment Systems: Some Economics of SEPA”, Bank of Finland Discussion Paper, 2008 forthcoming.Mian, A. and Sufi, A. (2007). “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the 2007 Mortgage Default Crisis”, NBER Working Paper 13936.Schmiedel, H. (2007), “The Economic Impact of the Single Euro Payments Area”, European Central Bank Occasional Paper Series, No. 71, 2007.Stiroh, K. J. (2008), “Diversification in Banking”, in A. Berger, P. Molyneux and J. Wilson (eds.), Handbook of Banking, Oxford University Press. [1] See ECB (2008), Financial Integration Report.[2] See e.g. Stiroh (2006).[3] In fact, a number recent academic studies document a “return to retail” for U.S. commercial banks with managers and analysts touting the relative stability of consumer-based business lines (see for instance Hirtle and Stiroh, 2007).[4] Ashcraft and Schuermann (2008).[5] Capgemini et al. (2008).[6] Schmiedel (2007).[7] Beijnen and Bolt (2007).Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",real pleasur speak pragu european central bank centr financi studi research network confer would like thank organ confer compil interest stimul program special thank go host czech nation bank good cooper outstand local organ confer pragu remind schumpet born far away pragu small town name třešť schumpet said econom progress capitalist societi mean turmoil would cours unfair undu refer associ schumpet notion turmoil current period experienc financi market speech today would like focus retail bank sector contribut effici stabil financi market also light ongo financi market turbul also stress import retail payment infrastructur particular issu harmonis integr under singl euro payment area sepa project fundament basi effici stabil european retail financ market retail bank backbon bank activ retail sector bank particular expertis provid credit small mediums enterpris smes evalu associ risk smes main engin job creation econom growth also import driver innov economi therefor effici stabl retail bank busi need financ sme activ firm access global capit market heavili depend bank fund particular true european smes european market ventur capit remain small compar one us avail bank credit thus crucial sustain invest firm therefor play import role econom develop growth retail bank market innov effici possibl market integr retail bank sector key crucial borrow depositor charg similar fee cost similar bank servic across euro area howev indic retail bank integr suggest still signific room closer integr instanc dispers lend rate charg bank household nonfinanci corpor remain relat high across countri also quantiti indic bank integr suggest bank market integr boost introduct euro remain relat low level low level integr general attribut differ nation economi institut factor financi structur factor includ differ credit risk price model differ taxat regul also relat high level fragment retail infrastructur therefor effort respect integr retail bank sector need least sinc first effici integr retail bank sector would lead better alloc credit innov grow compani second macroeconom perspect would contribut foster econom growth strengthen transmiss chang offici interest rate economi therebi enhanc effect monetari polici time recent turbul financi market remind us integr process guid appropri provis safeguard financi stabil slide past decad signific transform bank busi model away tradit model base main retail deposit toward marketbas fund model signific recours specif fund instrument mortgag bond securitis made bank increas depend money capit market time cours less depend opportun expand custom basi fund although custom deposit still constitut largest part bank fund base share percentag total asset euro area bank sector declin shown chart slide last ten year access marketbas fund wholesal deposit allow bank rais larg amount fund relat low cost order financ provis new loan extent stabl retail deposit financ replac shortterm wholesal fund bank may becom expos interest rate liquid risk recent financi market turmoil shortcom increas depend financi market becom appar increas diversif bank incom sourc via higher brokerag fee commiss generic call noninterest incom anoth structur trend bank chang busi model diversif incom provid bank addit sourc incom empir studi concern effect incom diversif profit tend conclud posit correl noninterest incom profit allow bank principl reap benefit diversif literatur concern impact diversif sourc revenu volatil bank earn point stabilis effect incom diversif profit due negat correl noninterest incom interest incom noninterest incom volatil interest incom howev import aspect relat potenti impact financi stabil recent literatur investig incom diversif effect financi stabil conclud general incom diversif tend increas system risk inde even though incom diversif tend increas profit strong profit bank better abl absorb loss thus strengthen financi stabil strategi time increas financi stabil risk increas relianc noninterest incom sourc entail higher exposur bank major global risk particular relat capit market also diversif impli institut becom increas involv similar set activ case becom like whenev institut face difficulti other well increas interdepend might propag possibl amplifi shock system level current financi market turmoil reveal weak under chang busi model slide extrem exampl high depend noninterest incom would case us invest bank hous chart b show us invest bank also typic profit commerci bank also show earn volatil commerci bank larg european univers bank term profit somewhat middl commerci invest bank less expect given broader busi model natur combin retail invest bank activ drop profit experienc invest bank much pronounc commerci bank chart c slide slide financi turmoil stark illustr marketbas fund heavili depend market percept includ trust confid deposit fund proven stabl ongo financi market turmoil sourc bank fund cours factor play chart d show ongo turbul market valu posit institut fund via custom deposit relat recent event illustr benefit longterm relationship bank depositor borrow mention financi turmoil also illustr possibl implic bank chang busi model financi stabil let emphasis principl market fund particular securitis provid signific benefit term risk share diversif howev recent crisi highlight featur market strong impair order function market ensur order function market transpar crucial bank need proper evalu disclos risk use proper valuat techniqu need good regul regul give right incent contain risk also regul flexibl enough adapt innov financi market allow financi innov help enlarg capac invest growth diversif risk market import retail bank like reviv background ongo turmoil effici competit sector certain high import nonetheless ensur smooth function retail bank market need good regul stabl infrastructur place bring second part speech role retail infrastructur slide realize singl euro payment area sepa import two reason first contribut creat competit integr european retail payment market therebi foster innov growth retail bank sector second time sepa contribut smooth safe under payment infrastructur provid basi stabl transact retail bank level contribut safeguard financi stabil sepa individu corpor abl make cashless payment throughout euro area singl payment account anywher euro area use singl set payment instrument easili effici safe make today nation level slide especi time sourc incom bank volatil payment servic contribut bank busi bank count reliabl regular revenu generat payment servic payment servic import part bank industri account third oper cost bank around revenu also reflect fact accord latest figur noncash payment transact european countri grew averag annual rate past six year stem ongo modernis payment mean system moreov payment servic also import help bank establish longterm relationship custom privat individu well corpor econom perspect effici safe payment system import facilit real financi transact advanc economi eurosystem continu support creation sepa play activ role catalyst offer platform debat among various stakehold regard advantag fulli integr market retail payment servic slide sepa make import contribut toward integr payment market europ foster financi market effici bring substanti econom benefit societi also shown today confer sepa offer enorm potenti bank nonbank corpor consum societi whole also recent ecb studi conclud bank may signific reduc cost face increas competit put downward pressur price revenu alreadi today price payment servic gone number euro area countri sepa also offer market particip opportun market new valuead servic relat payment chain empir evid support view harmonis standardis retail payment process across euro area like creat economi scale provis payment servic europ signific cost effici gain expect continu consolid across border overal sepa bring greater standardis harmonis retail payment market therebi promot competit innov time sepa play crucial role foster effici stabil retail bank sector slide major mileston direct greater harmon launch sepa credit transfer januari prepar sepa direct debit sdd progress well sdd launch schedul st novemb work also ongo epay mobil payment channel well improv sepa credit transfer time bank stress might tempt slow process modernis innov payment servic opposit need new sepa standard need implement old one phase need set end date final realize new product process find clariti price servic easier said done requir effort stakehold bank custom public author initi need much work remain done complet sepa project sepa play crucial role foster effici stabil retail bank sector conclud remark retail bank proven area stabil within bank busi recent month credit market play crucial role allow save flow effici borrow via credit credit come latin word creder mean believ symbol trust crucial prerequisit function credit market retail bank level well trust disappoint uncertainti soar serious consequ function financi market therefor trust stem good transpar busi practis sound busi model bank robust stabl retail bank infrastructur sepa make import contribut respect provid singl euro integr retail payment infrastructur contribut effici time stabl financi market retail level author well privat sector need strive progress field payment infrastructur loos momentum creat integr harmonis retail market europ confer offer good opportun discuss recent advanc field retail bank provid import contribut better understand develop retail bank wish us continu stimul present fruit discuss final let stress see retail payment promis avenu futur research recent retail payment issu receiv greater prioriti academ agenda effort made analys essenti element evolv dynam retail payment industri background let draw attent european central bank de nederlandsch bank host confer entitl retail payment integr innov may confer anticip two day interest discuss high topic relev issu relat retail payment mayb meet next year frankfurt ashcraft schuermann understand securit subprim mortgag credit feder reserv bank new york staff report bolt w chakravorti consum choic merchant accept payment media mimeo capgeminiroy bank scottlandeuropean financi manag market associ world payment report beijnen ch w bolt size matter economi scale european payment process dnb work paper novemb dell ariccia g igan d laeven l credit boom lend standard evid subprim mortgag market intern monetari fund work paper ecb financi integr report european commiss sepa potenti benefit stake research impact sepa payment market stakehold capgemini consult financi stabil forum report financi stabil forum enhanc market institut resili march hirtl b j stiroh k j return retail perform u bank journal bank financ jonker n koss toward european payment market survey result crossbord payment behaviour dutch consum dnb occasion studi vol kemppainen k integr european retail payment system econom sepa bank finland discuss paper forthcom mian sufi consequ mortgag credit expans evid mortgag default crisi nber work paper schmiedel h econom impact singl euro payment area european central bank occasion paper seri stiroh k j diversif bank berger p molyneux j wilson ed handbook bank oxford univers press see ecb financi integr report see e g stiroh fact number recent academ studi document return retail u commerci bank manag analyst tout relat stabil consumerbas busi line see instanc hirtl stiroh ashcraft schuermann capgemini et al schmiedel beijnen bolt reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en