"Yves Mersch: Law, money and market: the legal dimension of monetary policy",31-05-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,3685,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,Thank you very much for inviting me to speak at this event. What I would like to address in my remarks is what went wrong with the governance of the euro area and how to fix it. But as this has been much discussed in the past, I want to come at the question today from a slightly different perspective: that is, to go back to the first principles of what makes a market economy function, and then to look at the situation in the euro area from there.A well-functioning free market is a socio-economic construct. It is created by a consistent accord of rules, instruments and institutions.As economies develop, what this accord entails changes. But at the most fundamental level there must be a harmony of law, money and freedom. This is because the rule of law guarantees the freedom of the individual by defining the scope and boundaries of his or her action. And in turn, it is the freedom of the individual that creates the agency and choice which is essential to produce a free market to the benefit of the whole society. The way money fits into this framework was well illustrated by Nicolas Oresme, who was bishop of Lisieux and adviser to Charles V, the king of France. In 1360 Oresme initiated a sweeping monetary reform after a period in which the currency was debased many times. A comment that is attributed to him at this time is that “Money must be as solid as a law, as stable as a law of nature”. [1] In essence, what Oresme was saying was that solid law and stable money are two sides of the same coin (if you will forgive the expression). They both support the ends of the individual. The law exists to create an environment in which individuals can make free and safe decisions. Money is the same. And both are pre-conditions for a market economy to function.Even one of our most famous Luxembourgeois, John the Blind, implicitly appreciated these interactions. By experimenting with various currency reforms he sought to ensure that each coin in his realm would have the same value in trade and commerce, regardless of its geographic origin or disparities in physical appearance. At the time of course the debate was about the law of God taking precedence over the law of kings. But fittingly, his motto was “Ich dien” – German for “I serve”. And indeed, this notion of money as “public service” was exported and lived on: the same phrase appeared on British two pence coins until 2008. Thus, there is a long intellectual tradition linking rule of law and sound money to functioning of free markets. But this connection found perhaps its clearest expression in the ordoliberal school that developed in Germany in the 1930s. Conceived at the University of Freiburg by Walter Eucken and Franz Boehm, the central understanding of ordoliberalism was that a stable and well-functioning market economy required a strong legal and institutional framework. Pure laissez-faire capitalism was unstable and liable to capture by monopolies. Collectivist central planning, on the other hand, led towards waste and totalitarianism.Thus, as the ordoliberals saw it, the role of government was to frame markets in such a way that actual outcomes would approximate the theoretical outcome in a perfectly competitive market. Achieving such outcomes could imply de-regulation, if government was interfering too much in market processes, or re-regulation, if market failures were apparent – a feature that distinguished it from a laissez-faire approach. In other words, the role of government was both to untie the “invisible hand”, and to keep it firmly cuffed to the rule of law. At the same time, ordoliberalism recognised the crucial importance of monetary and economic stability to a well-functioning market. This implied an economic framework built around price stability, competition regulation and budgetary discipline – in Eucken’s words, the perfect “economic constitution”. [2] This thinking had a strong influence on the design of the post-war social market economy in Germany, and is seen by some as the foundation for German economic success in that period.Interestingly, as many developing countries transitioned from planned to market economies in the 1980s and 1990s, there was something of a large-scale social experiment of the ordoliberals’ views outside of Germany. Several transition economies followed the macroeconomic policy recommendations of the so-called Washington Consensus, which emphasised the laissez-faire side of liberalism – decentralization, deregulation and privatization – while downplaying the legal and institutional underpinnings of a well-functioning market economy..The “poster boy” for this approach was Chile in the 1980s under the influence Augusto Pinochet and German immigrants connected to his regime, together with the so-called “Chicago Boys.” [3] While quite striking results were achieved initially, leading Milton Friedman to refer to “the miracle of Chile”, financial speculation and foreign debt quickly built up behind the scenes. Moreover, privatisation allowed formerly public monopolies to become private monopolies – precisely what market-oriented reforms were supposed to avoid. The speculation bubble then burst in 1982, after which economic policy changed track.A similar pattern was observable in other transition economies. Russia, for example, privatised and liberalised extensively following the collapse of the U.S.S.R. Without a a solid legal and institutional framework to organise market interactions, however, the country experienced a series of crises, while resources ended up being concentrated in the hands of a few powerful individuals.These experiences led the assumptions of the Washington Consensus to be progressively revised. Even the IMF acknowledged the flaws in the original list of suggestions, in particular regarding the importance of institutions. [4] Reviewing the available evidence, the economist Dani Rodrik wrote that the strength of institutions is the most important element of development economics. The mantra of the so-called “revised” Washington Consensus, he wrote, should be to “get the institutions right.” [5]The aim of this brief review is to underscore that all well-functioning market economies are based on a consistent accord of rules, instruments and institutions. And what I would like to turn to now is the state of that accord in the euro area. The designers of the euro area clearly intended to build a consistent rules-based framework. [6] The euro area fitted within a single market centred on a strong competition authority that could break-up monopolies and remove competitive distortions. The ECB was established with a mandate to focus solely on price stability. National fiscal policies were expected to be stability-oriented and conducted within a strict framework, known as the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP). This would be supplemented, it was believed, by the disciplinary force of financial markets. This begs the question: why did the euro area then have a major crisis? The answer, in short, is that the designers got it wrong. The accord of rules, instruments and institutions in the euro area was in fact inconsistent. There were two dimensions to this:The first was inconsistency within policy areas, which produced a fragmented and unstable governance framework.The second was inconsistency between policy areas, which caused negative interactions between them to appear.Let me address each in turn.In a highly integrated currency area like the euro area, there are several types of economic policies that are “of common concern”. This may be because they have consequences on euro area aggregates – for example, excess domestic demand in one large country pushing up overall euro area inflation – or because they create spillovers for other Member States. These policies therefore warrant some form of coordination at the euro area level, notably via common rules. The implementation of these rules, however, can broadly speaking take two forms.One form is where rules are agreed centrally but applied decentrally by national authorities. For this to work, however, there has to be very little room for discretion in how those rules are applied. Otherwise, political and economic preferences at the national level or industry lobbies can lead to substantial divergence between member countries. This in turn risks externalities for others in the currency area. Another form is where rules are agreed centrally and applied centrally by a European institution. In this case there can be discretionary decision-making, as the European institution, provided it has sufficient independence, is not influenced by preferences at the national level. Moreover, through appropriate accountability arrangements it will be de facto forced to take a euro area-wide view and apply that discretion evenly. When EMU was launched, only really monetary policy conformed to one of these forms. Monetary policy decision-making was fully centralised in a European institution, the ECB, which had substantial discretion in how it implemented its tasks. This was made possible by the ECB’s clear mandate referenced in terms of the euro area as a whole, for which it was accountable ex post. This internal consistency explains why monetary policy is the only part of the EMU framework that has clearly functioned as designed.Fiscal policies were supposed to conform to the other form of governance, where countries would decide on and execute their own budgets, but within the strict constraints of the deficit and debt limits set in the Treaty. Those limits were supposed to be policed by markets, the Commission and other Member States, but in practice the incentives of the latter to enforce the rules were weak. This meant that de facto rules could be applied with discretion, while Member States themselves decided on how to exercise that discretion – in other words, the worst combination of the two forms.The result was that fiscal positions diverged significantly, which then created substantial spillovers for other euro area members. But perhaps more fundamentally, internal inconsistency meant that fiscal policy itself became ineffective in several jurisdictions. A number of governments either did not have the fiscal space to absorb the shock they faced in the early stage of the crisis, or they were unable to maintain the trust of the market when investors finally reacted – and over-reacted. Fiscal policy therefore had to effectively give up its stabilisation function – which is vital with a single monetary policy – and switch to convincing investors of debt sustainability.Prudential policies were also supposed to fit the decentralised model, although here the framework was even looser. While a general set of rules for European banks was progressively established in successive capital requirements directives, substantial flexibility remained in how those rules was interpreted at the national level. The Lamfalussy process was launched in an effort to iron out these differences, but the process rested entirely on cooperation between national supervisors, with no possibilities for binding mediation or enforcement at the European level – and it was fiercely resisted by countries with financial centres.The divergence this permitted in the application of regulatory and supervisory standards allowed serious financial imbalances to build-up in some jurisdictions, which then of course created serious blowback for the euro area. But similar to fiscal policies, an inconsistent framework also undermined the value of prudential policy itself. As, for example, definitions of forbearance and non-performing exposures differed widely across countries, investors simply did not trust in banks’ stated asset values and provisions. In other words, the confidence effects that prudential policy is supposed to provide disappeared when they were most needed.For structural policies there were no binding European rules at all, as they were seen as having a primarily national significance. These governance arrangements were not only internally inconsistent, however; they were inconsistent with each other. Governance of the euro area can be imagined like a set of interlocking cogs wheels: they do not all need to be of similar size – that is, we do not necessarily need the same degree of centralisation in each area – but they need to all move in the same direction. If one cog moves in the other direction, the whole machine grinds to a halt.There were several inconsistencies between policy areas in the euro area that had such a countervailing effect.To begin with, the frameworks for economic and financial policies pulled in different directions. Increasing financial integration encouraged capital to flow from core to periphery, but this was not accompanied by increasing integration of product and services markets to ensure that this capital was allocated efficiently. In fact, as competitive pressures remained weak, in particular in the non-tradable/services sector, certain industries were able to maintain excessive rents and distort price signals. This meant that the low marginal product of capital in these industries was offset by rising profit margins, leading capital to become misallocated.The fiscal and financial frameworks also interacted negatively with one another. In particular, policy-makers underestimated the extent to which financial integration depended on the false perception of relatively homogenous sovereign credit risk. As euro area banks were heavily exposed to own governments’ debt, when perceptions of sovereign creditworthiness diverged, so did confidence in their respective banking systems. The resulting market fragmentation further increased sovereign risk, entrenched domestic banks as the marginal buyer of their sovereigns’ debt, and thus deepened this bank-sovereign nexus.Finally, the interaction between bank and sovereign risk jarred with the single monetary policy. A fragmented banking system not only impaired monetary policy transmission. But more fundamentally, it called into question the singleness of money. Money, it has to be remembered, is a liability of the banking system. Banknotes represent only a fraction of the money we use daily; the bulk of money is deposits. Thus, for there to be a truly single money, there has to be full fungibility of deposits across borders. If confidence in national banking systems diverges, such that a deposit in one jurisdiction is seen to worth less than a deposit in another, then money within the euro area is no longer unquestionably single.To sum up, the problems the euro area has faced derive from the fact that it did not learn its own lesson. The stability of European countries in the second half of the 20th century was based on providing their national economies with the right accord of rules, institutions and instruments to produce desirable market outcomes. Yet when it came to the euro area economy, these tried and tested principles were somehow overlooked. Several policy areas were governed inconsistently, with little reflection given to how the different cogs wheels would fit together.The main aim of the euro area today is therefore to bring consistency back: that is, to make governance of different policy areas mutually consistent and internally consistent. Let me briefly review how this is being addressed in the banking, fiscal and economic domains.Since 2012, the priority has been to restore consistency between the single monetary policy and other policies – that is, to guarantee the singleness of money irrespective of the fiscal health of sovereigns. Essentially, this had to involve removing the fault lines between national banking systems that called into question the fungibility of deposits, and that meant bringing those national systems together into a single system. This is where the banking union comes in.Banking union means three things: it means a single supervisory framework that minimises equally the risk that a euro area bank takes excessive risk and runs into failure. It means a single resolution framework, so that if a bank does still fail, it can be resolved in the same way, with limited use of taxpayer money, irrespective of where the bank is located or the fiscal strength of its government. And it means a system of deposit protection that provides depositors with equal confidence that their deposits are safe, regardless of jurisdiction.In terms of implementing these three elements, the euro area has made considerable progress. And importantly, the governance reforms that have been agreed are much more internally consistent. They come close to the two ideal forms that I mentioned earlier: in some areas there will be centralisation and discretion; in others decentralisation and no discretion. From November this year banking supervision will be centralised in the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). Bank resolution will also be centralised in the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM). The latter is particularly important as the legal framework it will implement – the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) – contains quite some discretionary exemptions, in particular from the new bail-in provisions. For deposit guarantee, there is no centralisation yet. But under the recently adopted directive national schemes will have to meet the same minimum standards for levels and funding, meaning that there is also little discretion. Implementation, therefore, will be key.Banking Union will certainly help reduce the impact of sovereign risk on the banking system. But still, there is little that can be done if sovereigns pursue manifestly unsound fiscal policies. Domestic banks remain heavily exposed to their sovereigns. And any regulatory initiatives to address this issue – e.g. large exposure limits or doing away with the risk-free treatment of sovereign debt – can only be introduced very gradually in order to avoid market turmoil, and most likely only in the context of other governance reforms. Thus, to be consistent, a single banking system and a single currency require a fiscal framework that guarantees budgetary solidity.The euro area has done a lot since the start of the crisis to strengthen fiscal rules. In particular, Member States have sought to move away from the unstable middle ground of the first SGP by anchoring fiscal rules more firmly in national law. The Fiscal Compact – which requires countries to run balanced budgets over the cycle and reduce their debt levels progressively towards 60% of GDP – has to be written into national constitutions or equivalent, and is overseen by national fiscal councils. This comes closer to the model of having decentralised implementation of rules, but with very little discretion. But will this be enough? I see two possible outcomes.The first is a stable equilibrium between centralised banking governance and decentralised fiscal governance. That is, banking union better insulates national budgets from financial shocks, meaning budget deficits are generally milder. And in this context, the Fiscal Compact provides sufficient medium-term credibility to allow fiscal policy to operate counter-cyclically without threatening market access. The second possibility is some form of deeper fiscal union at the euro area level.Clearly, the political economy of deeper fiscal integration is difficult, especially given the preferences expressed at the recent European Parliament elections in some reform-resistant countries. Thus, we should focus our efforts for now on making the new equilibrium work. But here again we need consistency. If the current fiscal rules are to be credible, we need higher growth, and that means looking deeply at how we coordinate structural policies across Europe.On our current reform-resistant course, I see a distant but distinct probability that growth in the euro area begins a secular downward drift. With inflexible markets, downswings are likely to deeper, as adjustment has to happen slowly through quantities – i.e. unemployment – rather than quickly prices. And with low productivity and investment, upswings might be shallower as growth is driven only by cyclical rather than structural factors. Indeed, most estimates find that potential growth in the euro area has diminished during the crisis.This is why moving ahead with structural reform is essential. The best way to raise real growth in the euro area is to open up product and services markets and to reallocate resources to the most productive industries. When I see that most countries in the euro area periphery have a revealed comparative advantage in services [7], and yet these markets are the least integrated in Europe, it strikes me as a missed opportunity.Implementing structural reforms is of course mainly a national responsibility. But so far we have not done enough at the European level to help gather momentum behind them. Some might argue that the European elections will make this harder still, but I would tend to disagree. First, the reasons for extremism in some countries have more to do with national governments than with Europe. Second, what is causing some people to turn against the EU, in my view, is not a dislike of European governance per se; it is a lack of delivery on jobs and growth. If European policy-makers can find better ways to get the most out the European project, I strongly doubt the voters as a whole would be against that.Let me conclude.What I have tried to underline today is that a well-functioning market depends on getting the rules, institutions and instruments that govern it right. And the source of the euro area’s difficulties, in my view, is that policy-makers failed to do so. For this reason, it would be wrong to conclude that Europe, or the euro, has failed. It was policy that failed. But importantly, policy can also be fixed. What we need now, therefore, is to finish what we started in 1999 and make the euro area work.We have done much to stabilise the euro area with Banking Union and other reforms; but now we need to find ways to make the euro area sustainably grow. Voters in Europe have overall given policy-makers a mandate to do this; we have a pro-European majority in Parliament. If we do not seize this mandate, however, they may not provide another one.[1] “Moneta debt esse quasi quaedam lex et quaedam ordinacio firma”. Nicolas Oresme, Traité de la première invention des monnaies (ca. 1355).[2]Vanberg, Viktor J. “The Freiburg School: Walter Eucken and Ordoliberalism.” Walter Eucken Institut, April 2004.[3]The Chicago Boys were a group of young, liberal economists from Chile educated at the University of Chicago.[4]“Report on the Evaluation of the Role of the IMF in Argentina, 1991-2001.”Independent Evaluation Office of the IMF, July 2004.[5]Rodrik, Dani, et al. “Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions over Integration and Geography in Economic Development.” IMF Working Paper Series, November 2002.[6]For a more in depth exposition of this argument see: Nedergaard, Peter. “The Influence of Ordoliberalism in European Integration Processes: A Framework for Ideational Influence with Competition Policy and the Economic and Monetary Policy as Examples.” MPRA Paper No. 52331, December 2013.[7]For more details see Rahman, Jesmin and Tianli Zhao. “The Role of Vertical Supply Chains in Boosting Growth”, in Jobs and Growth: Supporting the European Recovery, IMF, April 2014. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen thank much invit speak event would like address remark went wrong govern euro area fix much discuss past want come question today slight differ perspect go back first principl make market economi function look situat euro area wellfunct free market socioeconom construct creat consist accord rule instrument institut economi develop accord entail chang fundament level must harmoni law money freedom rule law guarante freedom individu defin scope boundari action turn freedom individu creat agenc choic essenti produc free market benefit whole societi way money fit framework well illustr nicola oresm bishop lisieux advis charl v king franc oresm initi sweep monetari reform period currenc debas mani time comment attribut time money must solid law stabl law natur essenc oresm say solid law stabl money two side coin forgiv express support end individu law exist creat environ individu make free safe decis money precondit market economi function even one famous luxembourgeoi blind implicit appreci interact experi various currenc reform sought ensur coin realm would valu trade commerc regardless geograph origin dispar physic appear time cours debat law god take preced law king fit motto ich dien german serv inde notion money public servic export live phrase appear british two penc coin thus long intellectu tradit link rule law sound money function free market connect found perhap clearest express ordoliber school develop germani conceiv univers freiburg walter eucken franz boehm central understand ordoliber stabl wellfunct market economi requir strong legal institut framework pure laissezfair capit unstabl liabl captur monopoli collectivist central plan hand led toward wast totalitarian thus ordoliber saw role govern frame market way actual outcom would approxim theoret outcom perfect competit market achiev outcom could impli deregul govern interf much market process reregul market failur appar featur distinguish laissezfair approach word role govern unti invis hand keep firm cuf rule law time ordoliber recognis crucial import monetari econom stabil wellfunct market impli econom framework built around price stabil competit regul budgetari disciplin eucken word perfect econom constitut think strong influenc design postwar social market economi germani seen foundat german econom success period interest mani develop countri transit plan market economi someth largescal social experi ordoliber view outsid germani sever transit economi follow macroeconom polici recommend socal washington consensus emphasis laissezfair side liber decentr deregul privat downplay legal institut underpin wellfunct market economi poster boy approach chile influenc augusto pinochet german immigr connect regim togeth socal chicago boy quit strike result achiev initi lead milton friedman refer miracl chile financi specul foreign debt quick built behind scene moreov privatis allow former public monopoli becom privat monopoli precis marketori reform suppos avoid specul bubbl burst econom polici chang track similar pattern observ transit economi russia exampl privatis liberalis extens follow collaps u r without solid legal institut framework organis market interact howev countri experienc seri crise resourc end concentr hand power individu experi led assumpt washington consensus progress revis even imf acknowledg flaw origin list suggest particular regard import institut review avail evid economist dani rodrik wrote strength institut import element develop econom mantra socal revis washington consensus wrote get institut right aim brief review underscor wellfunct market economi base consist accord rule instrument institut would like turn state accord euro area design euro area clear intend build consist rulesbas framework euro area fit within singl market centr strong competit author could breakup monopoli remov competit distort ecb establish mandat focus sole price stabil nation fiscal polici expect stabilityori conduct within strict framework known stabil growth pact sgp would supplement believ disciplinari forc financi market beg question euro area major crisi answer short design got wrong accord rule instrument institut euro area fact inconsist two dimens first inconsist within polici area produc fragment unstabl govern framework second inconsist polici area caus negat interact appear let address turn high integr currenc area like euro area sever type econom polici common concern may consequ euro area aggreg exampl excess domest demand one larg countri push overal euro area inflat creat spillov member state polici therefor warrant form coordin euro area level notabl via common rule implement rule howev broad speak take two form one form rule agre central appli decentr nation author work howev littl room discret rule appli otherwis polit econom prefer nation level industri lobbi lead substanti diverg member countri turn risk extern other currenc area anoth form rule agre central appli central european institut case discretionari decisionmak european institut provid suffici independ influenc prefer nation level moreov appropri account arrang de facto forc take euro areawid view appli discret even emu launch realli monetari polici conform one form monetari polici decisionmak fulli centralis european institut ecb substanti discret implement task made possibl ecb clear mandat referenc term euro area whole account ex post intern consist explain monetari polici part emu framework clear function design fiscal polici suppos conform form govern countri would decid execut budget within strict constraint deficit debt limit set treati limit suppos polic market commiss member state practic incent latter enforc rule weak meant de facto rule could appli discret member state decid exercis discret word worst combin two form result fiscal posit diverg signific creat substanti spillov euro area member perhap fundament intern inconsist meant fiscal polici becam ineffect sever jurisdict number govern either fiscal space absorb shock face earli stage crisi unabl maintain trust market investor final react overreact fiscal polici therefor effect give stabilis function vital singl monetari polici switch convinc investor debt sustain prudenti polici also suppos fit decentralis model although framework even looser general set rule european bank progress establish success capit requir direct substanti flexibl remain rule interpret nation level lamfalussi process launch effort iron differ process rest entir cooper nation supervisor possibl bind mediat enforc european level fierc resist countri financi centr diverg permit applic regulatori supervisori standard allow serious financi imbal buildup jurisdict cours creat serious blowback euro area similar fiscal polici inconsist framework also undermin valu prudenti polici exampl definit forbear nonperform exposur differ wide across countri investor simpli trust bank state asset valu provis word confid effect prudenti polici suppos provid disappear need structur polici bind european rule seen primarili nation signific govern arrang intern inconsist howev inconsist govern euro area imagin like set interlock cog wheel need similar size necessarili need degre centralis area need move direct one cog move direct whole machin grind halt sever inconsist polici area euro area countervail effect begin framework econom financi polici pull differ direct increas financi integr encourag capit flow core peripheri accompani increas integr product servic market ensur capit alloc effici fact competit pressur remain weak particular nontradableservic sector certain industri abl maintain excess rent distort price signal meant low margin product capit industri offset rise profit margin lead capit becom misalloc fiscal financi framework also interact negat one anoth particular policymak underestim extent financi integr depend fals percept relat homogen sovereign credit risk euro area bank heavili expos govern debt percept sovereign creditworthi diverg confid respect bank system result market fragment increas sovereign risk entrench domest bank margin buyer sovereign debt thus deepen banksovereign nexus final interact bank sovereign risk jar singl monetari polici fragment bank system impair monetari polici transmiss fundament call question singl money money rememb liabil bank system banknot repres fraction money use daili bulk money deposit thus truli singl money full fungibl deposit across border confid nation bank system diverg deposit one jurisdict seen worth less deposit anoth money within euro area longer unquestion singl sum problem euro area face deriv fact learn lesson stabil european countri second half th centuri base provid nation economi right accord rule institut instrument produc desir market outcom yet came euro area economi tri test principl somehow overlook sever polici area govern inconsist littl reflect given differ cog wheel would fit togeth main aim euro area today therefor bring consist back make govern differ polici area mutual consist intern consist let briefli review address bank fiscal econom domain sinc prioriti restor consist singl monetari polici polici guarante singl money irrespect fiscal health sovereign essenti involv remov fault line nation bank system call question fungibl deposit meant bring nation system togeth singl system bank union come bank union mean three thing mean singl supervisori framework minimis equal risk euro area bank take excess risk run failur mean singl resolut framework bank still fail resolv way limit use taxpay money irrespect bank locat fiscal strength govern mean system deposit protect provid depositor equal confid deposit safe regardless jurisdict term implement three element euro area made consider progress import govern reform agre much intern consist come close two ideal form mention earlier area centralis discret other decentralis discret novemb year bank supervis centralis singl supervisori mechan ssm bank resolut also centralis singl resolut mechan srm latter particular import legal framework implement bank recoveri resolut direct brrd contain quit discretionari exempt particular new bailin provis deposit guarante centralis yet recent adopt direct nation scheme meet minimum standard level fund mean also littl discret implement therefor key bank union certain help reduc impact sovereign risk bank system still littl done sovereign pursu manifest unsound fiscal polici domest bank remain heavili expos sovereign regulatori initi address issu e g larg exposur limit away riskfre treatment sovereign debt introduc gradual order avoid market turmoil like context govern reform thus consist singl bank system singl currenc requir fiscal framework guarante budgetari solid euro area done lot sinc start crisi strengthen fiscal rule particular member state sought move away unstabl middl ground first sgp anchor fiscal rule firm nation law fiscal compact requir countri run balanc budget cycl reduc debt level progress toward gdp written nation constitut equival overseen nation fiscal council come closer model decentralis implement rule littl discret enough see two possibl outcom first stabl equilibrium centralis bank govern decentralis fiscal govern bank union better insul nation budget financi shock mean budget deficit general milder context fiscal compact provid suffici mediumterm credibl allow fiscal polici oper countercycl without threaten market access second possibl form deeper fiscal union euro area level clear polit economi deeper fiscal integr difficult especi given prefer express recent european parliament elect reformresist countri thus focus effort make new equilibrium work need consist current fiscal rule credibl need higher growth mean look deepli coordin structur polici across europ current reformresist cours see distant distinct probabl growth euro area begin secular downward drift inflex market downsw like deeper adjust happen slowli quantiti e unemploy rather quick price low product invest upsw might shallow growth driven cyclic rather structur factor inde estim find potenti growth euro area diminish crisi move ahead structur reform essenti best way rais real growth euro area open product servic market realloc resourc product industri see countri euro area peripheri reveal compar advantag servic yet market least integr europ strike miss opportun implement structur reform cours main nation respons far done enough european level help gather momentum behind might argu european elect make harder still would tend disagre first reason extrem countri nation govern europ second caus peopl turn eu view dislik european govern per se lack deliveri job growth european policymak find better way get european project strong doubt voter whole would let conclud tri underlin today wellfunct market depend get rule institut instrument govern right sourc euro area difficulti view policymak fail reason would wrong conclud europ euro fail polici fail import polici also fix need therefor finish start make euro area work done much stabilis euro area bank union reform need find way make euro area sustain grow voter europ overal given policymak mandat proeuropean major parliament seiz mandat howev may provid anoth one moneta debt ess quasi quaedam lex et quaedam ordinacio firma nicola oresm traité de la premièr invent des monnai ca vanberg viktor j freiburg school walter eucken ordoliber walter eucken institut april chicago boy group young liber economist chile educ univers chicago report evalu role imf argentina independ evalu offic imf juli rodrik dani et al institut rule primaci institut integr geographi econom develop imf work paper seri novemb depth exposit argument see nedergaard peter influenc ordoliber european integr process framework ideat influenc competit polici econom monetari polici exampl mpra paper decemb detail see rahman jesmin tian zhao role vertic suppli chain boost growth job growth support european recoveri imf april reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en