Jürgen Stark: Enhancing the monetary analysis,07-09-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,4595,"<p> [1]Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a great pleasure for me to be here today at the ninth in this series of conferences entitled ‘The European Central Bank and its Watchers’. Over the past decade, this series has proved to be an important forum for constructive debate about monetary policy in Europe – a tradition that I hope will continue today.To dwell shortly on the conference’s title, the organisers have chosen to distinguish clearly between, on the one hand, those responsible for the conduct of monetary policy and, on the other, those who observe and comment upon it. Understandably, the perspectives and priorities of these two groups might be quite different at times, as will no doubt become apparent in the course of today’s proceedings. Let me illustrate with a short example. Drawing on the latest academic research, watchers often advise central banks pursuing price stability to ‘Just do it’. [2] No doubt, this is sound advice. Indeed, it points to an important principle, namely that monetary policy – and thus monetary policy makers – ultimately determine the rate of inflation and, by implication, whether price stability is maintained. But viewed from my office in the Eurotower, this advice – although sound – does not seem very relevant or useful. Like all my colleagues on the Governing Council, I am aware of the responsibilities conferred upon me by the Treaty. Collectively we act, in word and deed, to pursue our primary objective, the maintenance of price stability. Being reminded of our responsibilities is not harmful. But neither is it very helpful. What we seek is practical guidance for taking monetary policy decisions that serve the achievement of our objective. In response to your advice to ‘just do it,’ our natural response is ‘how?’This brings me to the topic of my comments this morning – enhancing the monetary analysis. No other aspect of our monetary policy has been the subject of such intense debate over the past decade, in this and other fora. But I wonder whether this debate has generated more heat than light. Opinions have become polarised. Some watchers argue that monetary analysis is irrelevant or even misleading. Other watchers argue for the adoption of monetary targeting, with interest rate geared to achieving a certain rate of money growth. What observers of the ECB have failed to provide is practical guidance about the conduct of monetary analysis and interpretation of monetary developments that is useful to policymakers. The staff of the ECB and the Eurosystem have had to fill this breach. Today, I will describe the results of some of their work and how we have used it in our policy deliberations. I will start by outlining a number of key empirical regularities relevant for monetary analysis. These empirical features have remained robust over the past two hundred years and continue to be so today. They provide a simple, yet powerful illustration of the economic principles underlying our monetary policy strategy. I will then tackle the crucial issue for applied monetary policy-making, namely the operationalisation of – and, in particular, the real time use of – monetary analysis for monetary policy purposes. After briefly reviewing the performance of monetary analysis in recent years, I will sketch the avenues that are currently being pursued to enhance the monetary analysis in the future. I hope that outlining our agenda in this way will act as a catalyst, engaging watchers and academics in a wider research effort to deepen and broaden our understanding of monetary developments and their implications.Underlying the institutional framework for monetary policy in Europe is the neutrality of monetary policy in the longer run. Monetary policy cannot affect real variables at long horizons. At these horizons, monetary policy only determines nominal variables, notably the price level and therefore the rate of inflation. We should be cautious about using the word ‘only’ in this context. Experience has demonstrated the considerable economic and social costs incurred when inflation runs out of control. Price stability is therefore the primary objective of the ECB, and the Governing Council has been assigned the responsibility for conducting monetary policy in pursuit of this goal. This much is consensus among economists, be they academics, practitioners or central bankers.Since monetary policy can ultimately only determine nominal variables, it is crucial that it be conducted within a nominal framework. A central bank that looked exclusively at real variables runs the risk of missing underlying nominal trends. Such trends may play little role in determining inflation one or two years ahead but – because of their persistence – can lead to a gradual, but lasting, drift of inflation away from levels consistent with price stability. Cross-checking the cyclical analysis focused on demand and cost dynamics with an assessment of longer-term nominal trends is therefore key. This is reflected in the ECB’s monetary policy strategy.This begs the question of which nominal variables should be used to assess these longer-term nominal trends. Monetary developments are a natural candidate for a central bank that, ultimately, is the monopoly provider of base money. But, in practice, I recognize that this is an empirical question. As the old adage says: ‘A picture is worth a thousand words’. Figure 1 shows the close and robust relationship between the trend components of inflation and money growth over very long periods for a selection of countries (Norway, since 1830; Australia, since 1863; the United Kingdom, since 1871; and the United States, since 1875). Over the past two centuries, upswings or downswings in trend money growth [3] have almost always been followed, a few years later, by swings in the same direction in trend inflation. [4] An important point to stress is that, as the figure makes clear (and as additional evidence for other countries confirms), the most recent period has not exhibited, in this respect, any difference whatsoever compared with the distant past. Indeed, if we focus on the euro area over the past thirty years, broadly the same empirical regularities emerge.On the basis of this picture, I wish to stress three crucial points.  First, the relationship between trend money growth and trend inflation has remained intact over the past two centuries, across a variety of different monetary policy regimes. Furthermore, as I have already stressed, the data for recent years exhibit the same regularities, including for the euro area (see Figure 2). This suggests that this feature of the data is ‘hardwired’ into the deep structure of the economy. Thus, on empirical grounds, the relationship between monetary growth and inflation appears invulnerable to the well-known Lucas critique. [5] In other words, the observed empirical relationship is structural in nature and does not disappear as policy shifts from one regime to another. Second , Figure 1 demonstrates – contrary to some recent literature [6] – that the relationship between money growth and inflation remains strong even in countries with low rates of average inflation. None of the four countries shown in Figure 1 have endured extreme events, such as hyperinflations, during the twentieth century – yet the relationship endures.  Finally  – and  crucially  – a careful analysis of the series plotted in Figure 1 reveals that developments in trend money growth lead developments in inflation by roughly 2-3 years  Therefore, by analyzing monetary developments – and, in particular, by identifying surges in trend money growth – a central bank can implement a policy that serves to contain the inflationary pressures stemming from the underlying nominal trends identified by the monetary analysis before they become manifest in inflation itself. These three crucial and robust features of the data motivate the ECB’s monetary analysis and determine how it has been pursued in practice. But before discussing in greater detail how these results should be operationalised and applied in a policy making context, allow me first to make a number of comments on the relationship between our framework and the so-called standard New-Keynesian model, which currently holds sway in many academic discussions of monetary policy. This model accords no meaningful role to money.Although such models can replicate the long-run relationship between money growth and inflation that we see in the data, they do not replicate one crucial feature of that relationship, namely the lead of trend money growth over trend inflation. In a standard New-Keynesian model – the workhorse of much recent academic investigation on monetary policy – trend money growth moves contemporaneously with trend inflation, or even lags it, rather than leading it by 2-3 years. [7] This peculiar property of the New Keynesian model standard in the academic literature is at odds with the empirical evidence from the last two hundred years (shown in Figure 1). This point is worth emphasizing. Suppose I observe a strong upward trend in monetary growth. On the basis of the standard New Keynesian model, this would not signal any subsequent upside risk to inflation. An analysis of monetary developments based on such a model would therefore inevitably be “behind the curve”, and unhelpful from a policy makers’ perspective. However, in reality every persistent upsurge in trend money growth has been followed by an upsurge in trend inflation. This feature of the data has remained broadly unchanged across various radically different monetary policy regimes.The in ability of the standard New Keynesian model to replicate this key feature of the data drives from its structure, which assumes that the monetary aggregates play a purely residual role. In other words, money is influenced by other variables, but it does not influence them in any way. If you accept the model’s intrinsic logic, then you ought to accept its key implication: money has no special role in monetary policy analysis. But such logic seems flawed. As is reflected in ongoing research by ECB staff (to which I will return later), there are many reasons why monetary variables may play an active role in the transmission of monetary policy and thus serve to determine, at least in part, macroeconomic outcomes, rather than just respond to them. Moreover, such research offers reasons why monetary developments may lead inflation, as implied by the data. What is worse, the model artificially trivializes the role of monetary analysis – “artificially” in the sense that money is marginalized on the basis of an ex ante assumption, rather than on the basis of anything observed in the data. Within the standard New-Keynesian framework, movements in inflation that persist beyond the business cycle are “explained” as the result of variations in the central bank’s inflation objective. The policy advice stemming from this framework is the admonition to ‘just do it’ that I have already mentioned. Surges in inflation like we saw globally in the 1970s are thus seen as something that was desired by the central bankers of the time. For me, such analysis does not quite ring true. A more plausible explanation is that even well-intentioned central bankers can sometimes make mistakes. In seeking to avoid the mistakes of the past, today’s policy makers seek robust early indicators of upward trends in inflation. The empirical evidence points to money as being among the foremost of such indicators. Monetary analysis therefore remains crucial in the credible pursuit of price stability.Monetary policy decisions necessarily have to be taken in ‘ real time’, on the basis of the data and the models available at the moment of decision. In this context, uncertainty about data and models abounds. The stylised relations between trend money growth and trend inflation shown in Figure 1 cannot be used directly by the policy maker.  In practice, central bank monetary analysis must therefore form an assessment of the current underlying or trend rate of monetary expansion in real time, in order to draw inferences about what this implies for the future trend rate of inflation. While such an approach embraces the robust empirical relationships I have already discussed, it has to be operationalised and employed in a pragmatic way. An apparatus needs to be developed in order to translate the robust underlying empirical regularities into practical guidance for interest rate decisions. Choices have to be made about which measures of money to follow. Assessments have to be made of how these measures may have been affected by temporary factors that cause them to deviate from the underlying trend rate of monetary expansion. All this requires a broad-based approach , [8] which embodies three main elements:  First , rather than focusing exclusively on developments in headline M3 growth in relation to the Eurosystem’s reference value – as the ECB’s monetary analysis is sometimes erroneously characterised – the broad-based approach to monetary analysis draws on the fullest possible set of monetary, financial and economic information. The components, counterparts and sectoral composition of M3 and other monetary and credit aggregates are studied in detail, in conjunction with other financial flows deriving from the financial accounts. Financial market developments and yields are assessed for the implications they have for monetary conditions – an assessment that is likely to be central to our analysis in the coming months given recent events. Broader macroeconomic developments and data are also assessed to the extent that they are informative about the portfolio, financing and spending decisions that influence monetary and credit dynamics. Second , the broad-based approach employs a suite of empirical models of various types, including money demand equations, time series indicator models and structural general equilibrium models. These models are used to explain developments in money and credit variables, identify unusual innovations in these variables and assess their possible implications for price developments and the broader macroeconomic and financial outlook. Third , the model-based analysis is complemented by the use of informed judgement, which builds in particular on the Eurosystem’s assessment of the structural evolution of the financial and monetary sectors of the economy. On the basis of a detailed analysis of changes in the banking and financial sector, ECB staff can identify product and technical innovations that are likely to impact monetary and credit dynamics and embody their implications in the overall assessment of the monetary data.These pragmatic tools are employed within a structured analytical framework that ensures both internal coherence of the diverse constituent elements of the comprehensive analysis and consistency over time. Specifically, all the tools are used to derive the best real time assessment of the current underlying rate of monetary expansion that – on the basis of the empirical regularities I have discussed – is robustly linked to longer-term inflationary trends.Within such a framework, we extract the policy-relevant information contained in monetary developments that is key to ensuring that trend inflation remains consistent with price stability. This has certainly been the experience of the ECB over the past 8½ years.To illustrate, allow me to refer briefly to two important examples from recent years that highlight how such a broad-based approach to monetary analysis has worked in practice.If you like, one can see these episodes as the two ‘ big calls’ monetary analysis has had to make during the first years of Monetary Union: how to interpret the two surges in monetary growth that took place from mid-2001 to early 2003 and from mid-2004 to end-2005.In the first period, we attributed the strong broad money growth observed in late 2001 to portfolio shifts into liquid monetary assets at a time of heightened economic and financial uncertainty. Such portfolio shifts were seen as temporary. The surge in M3 growth was thus viewed as unrepresentative of the underlying rate of monetary expansion and, as such, rather benign in terms of the outlook for price stability. Strong headline M3 growth was therefore not an impediment to the cuts in interest rates that took place from 2001. In the second period , the surge in monetary growth in 2005 was attributed to strong credit growth driven by the prevailing favourable financing conditions, in turn supported by financial innovations that eased the supply of bank credit. Such dynamics were viewed as more representative of the underlying rate of monetary expansion and thus seen as of potential concern for the outlook for price stability. As has been emphasised by the President in the past, the intensification of these concerns in the course of 2005 was one of the factors underlying the Governing Council’s decision to commence withdrawing monetary policy accommodation in December 2005.With the (considerable) benefit of hindsight, the real time judgement underlying these two “big calls” has broadly been proved correct. The implementation of the single monetary policy on the basis of the ECB’s strategy has proved very successful. Inflation rates in the euro area have been brought down to and maintained at low levels by historical standards. Crucially, the ECB has successfully managed to stabilise longer-term private inflation expectations at historically low levels. As is illustrated by these examples, my answer to the question whether monetary analysis contributed to this success of the monetary policy of the ECB is a clear yes, albeit with a weight that varied over time. But our past success means does not mean that we can afford to be complacent. To quote Winston Churchill, “ success is not final”.For a decision maker, success in the past is not a sufficient guarantee of success in the future. Past success may even be dangerous. It might lead to the fallacious assumption that medium- to longer-term price stability can be taken for granted, freeing central banks to concentrate solely on the smoothing of inflation and output around a secure and stable steady-state. It is thus important to stay continuously vigilant, all the more so after a period of success. Vigilance has to be exercised not only for the identification of risks to price stability, but as well for the tools we use to identify those risks, as tools are likely to change over time. For example, financial innovation may change the transmission of monetary policy or the appropriate measurement of monetary liquidity. In the case of monetary analysis, I see the need to pursue work along four avenues, in order to stay fit for the challenges in the future.  First, further work is required on money demand models for the euro area. Standard specifications embodying the conventional determinants of money demand cannot account for monetary developments in recent years. A natural avenue for further work is therefore to refine and extend money demand models so as to improve understanding of the recent behaviour of monetary aggregates. In this context, we must recognise that the adequate measurement of money may evolve over time to take into account a changing financial landscape. We must continually check and constructively question the statistical measurement of money and monetary liquidity in order to refine our assessment of the policy-relevant underlying monetary dynamics, which are not tied to the aggregation of a fixed money holding sector, nor tied to fixed asset classes.A number of exercises are being pursued in this regard. Sectoral analysis of money demand is particularly promising, [9] especially given the increased importance of non-monetary financial institutions in monetary developments that has emerged in recent years, in part as a consequence of financial innovation such as loan securitisation. Given the different transmission channels of different money holding sectors, a deepening of the current analysis in this respect is likely to increase our understanding of aggregated money demand. Moreover, including wealth as a determinant of money demand – and, more generally, placing the demand for money in the context of broader private portfolio decisions – is a promising and ongoing line of work. In turn, this will require a better understanding of the opportunity costs of holding money and the impact of risk and uncertainty on portfolio choices.  Second , to synthesise and summarise information derived from the ECB’s broad-based monetary analysis and to emphasise the use of monetary analysis as a guide to policy decisions aimed at the maintenance of price stability, it has proved useful to construct money-based inflation risk indicators. [10] These can help to summarise, in an easy-to-understand-way, the inflationary or deflationary risks identified by the broad-based, multidimensional and therefore necessarily somewhat complex monetary analysis. Ongoing work aims at improving the transparency, clarity and robustness of such indicators. One promising approach is the employment of Bayesian techniques (which allow introducing judgmental adjustments into the indicators in a more structured manner). Attempts to embody large data sets and tools such as factor models in the analysis are also underway. In adopting these techniques, we introduce a number of methodological approaches that are commonplace in the economic analysis into the monetary analysis, thereby seeking to benefit from the experience gained. Third , we continue to be at the forefront of introducing an active role for money and credit in structural general equilibrium models, thereby extending the standard new Keynesian framework I discussed earlier so as to address some of the specific critiques of that framework that I have raised. Such an approach allows the impact of financial frictions and factors on the cyclical behaviour of the economy – which are not embodied in the current benchmark academic models – to be assessed. [11] By extending standard models in this way, we at least start to develop frameworks that can begin to replicate the key regularities in the data on which many of my earlier comments relied, in particular the robust and enduring lead of trend money growth over trend inflation. Fourth , it is important to deepen further the framework for cross-checking information and analysis stemming from the monetary and economic analyses. While cross-checking is ultimately necessarily the responsibility of policy makers who have to take a single interest rate decision on the basis of several inputs, building tools and methods to enhance and deepen this process is desirable. As yet, we are far from developing a comprehensive and encompassing model of the economy that embodies all real, monetary and financial factors and the interactions among them. Consequently, adopting a diversified approach to analysing data and cross-checking among the various analyses is necessary for successful policy design.A number of promising avenues are being pursued. The integrated sectoral accounts for the euro area provide one statistical framework for comparing economic and monetary data. More importantly, the relationship between monetary and credit dynamics, on the one hand, and asset prices, on the other, is one that is receiving increased attention. Recent research at the ECB has shown that monetary dynamics influence asset prices and thus also macroeconomic dynamics. [12]I have confidence that pursuing such a - doubtlessly demanding – analytical and research agenda will successfully improve our work as policy makers, allowing us to continue to state with full confidence: Money matters in monetary policy making. Overall, having experienced the challenges we faced in recent years, I currently do not see a single convincing theoretical framework that can replace the successful two pillar strategy of the ECB, let alone a practical apparatus that could be applied to real time policy making. The prominent role for money provides an explicit nominal framework within which underlying or persistent nominal trends in the economy can be identified and addressed, even if the business cycles do not point to inflation pressures. Cross checking between the economic and monetary analyses provides robustness to policy decisions by ensuring that a variety of models and views of the inflation process are entertained, thereby avoiding reliance on one model-specific view of “rationality”. This framework remains currently the best possible way to guarantee that money is accorded the appropriate relevance – recognised by most applied policy makers and practitioners – in a transparent and lasting way, avoiding the temptation to use money opportunistically when it suits.Against this background, the question of whether or not to monitor money and credit developments strikes policy makers – and, especially in the current financial market circumstances, any analyst linked to the financial markets – as odd. As I have demonstrated, at the ECB we are not lagging behind the latest academic work on monetary analysis and monetary policy. Rather mainstream academic work is lagging reality. As the current agenda of ongoing research to enhance the monetary analysis demonstrates, the ECB is in the vanguard of developing tools to conduct the “new and enlightened” monetary analysis that underpins our strategy. I invite all of you here today to join us in this quest. Together we can and should be the pioneers in developing the new tools for monetary analysis that are required to address the rapidly changing economic and financial environment.I thank you for your attention.Adalid, R. and C. Detken (2007), Liquidity shocks and asset price boom/bust cycles, ECB Working Paper No. 732. Benati, Luca (2007), ‘Money, Inflation, and New Keynesian Models’, European Central Bank Working Paper, forthcomingBruggeman, A., G. Camba-Méndez, B. Fischer and J. Sousa (2005), Structural filters for monetary analysis: the inflationary movements of money in the euro area, ECB Working Paper No. 470. Christiano, L., R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2007): “Shocks, Structures or Policies? The EA and the US after 2001”, forthcoming in the Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control.Christiano, Lawrence J., and Fitzgerald, Terry (2003), ‘The Band-Pass Filter’, International Economic Review, 44(2), pp. 435-465DeGrauwe, Paul, and Polan, Magdalena (2005), ‘Is Inflation Always and Everywhere a Monetary Phenomenon?’, Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 107(2), 239-259.Detken, C. and F. Smets (2004) “Asset price booms and monetary policy”, published in: Horst Siebert (ed.), “Macroeconomic Policies in the World Economy”, Springer, Berlin, 2004.ECB (2007) “Interpreting monetary developments since mid 2004”, ECB Monthly Bulletin, July.ECB (2004) “Monetary analysis in real time”, ECB Monthly Bulletin, October.Fischer, B., M. Lenza, H. Pill and L. Reichlin (2006), “Money and monetary policy: the ECB experience 1999-2006”, forthcoming in “The role of money: money and monetary policy in the 21st century”, ed. A. Beyer and L. Reichlin.Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1976), ‘Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique’, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 1, pp. 19-46Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1996), ‘Nobel Lecture: Monetary Neutrality’, Journal of Political Economy, 104(4), pp. 661-82Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (2006), ‘Remarks’ delivered at ‘Monetary Policy: A Journey from Theory to Practice - An ECB Colloquium Held in Honour of Otmar Issing’, Frankfurt am Main, 16 - 17 March 2006McCallum, B. (1995), ‘Two fallacies concerning central bank independence’, American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, vol 85, 207-22. Nelson, Edward (1998), ‘Sluggish Inflation and Optimising Models of the Business Cycle’, Journal of Monetary Economics, 42, pp. 303- 322Uhlig, H. (2007), Discussion of the papers “Monetary policy and stock market boom-bust cycle” by L. Christiano R. Motto and M. Rostagno and “Is money important for monetary policy?” by M. Woodford, at the 4th ECB Central Banking Conference on 9/10 November 2006, see http://www.ecb.europa.eu/events/pdf/conferences/cbc4/Discussion_Uhlig.pdfVon Landesberger, J. (2007), Sectoral money demand models for the euro area based on a common set of determinants, ECB Working Paper No. 741.Figure 1 Trend components of inflation and money growth since the Gold Standard era for Norway, Australia,the United Kingdom, and the United States (source: Benati, 2007)Figure 2 Trend components of inflation and money growth since 1970 in the euro are (source: Benati, 2007)[1] This draft has been prepared by L. Benati and B. Fischer with substantive contributions from H. Pill and M. Rostagno. Helpful comments from J.-P. Vidal are acknowledged.[2] McCallum (1995), Uhlig (2007).[3]  The trend components of money growth and inflation have been extracted via a standard statistical filter – see Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003) – and are defined as the very slow-moving components of the two series.[4] See Benati (2007); Bruggeman et al (2005).[5] See Lucas (1976).[6] De Grauwe and Polan (2005), for example, have stated that ‘ [t]he relation between inflation and money growth for low-inflation countries [...] is weak, if not absent’[7] This is shown in Benati (2007, Section 3) based on estimated New Keynesian models, a standard specification for the demand for real balances, and several alternative configurations of the parameters of the monetary policy rule. This problem of New Keynesian models was pointed out by Nelson (1998), but because of the academic profession’s move away from money in recent years, it has been essentially ignored. [8] See ECB (2004); ECB (2006).[9] See von Landesberger (2007).[10] See Fischer et al. (2007).[11] See Christiano et al. (2007).[12] See Detken and Smets (2004); Aladid and Detken (2007).Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur today ninth seri confer entitl european central bank watcher past decad seri prove import forum construct debat monetari polici europ tradit hope continu today dwell short confer titl organis chosen distinguish clear one hand respons conduct monetari polici observ comment upon understand perspect prioriti two group might quit differ time doubt becom appar cours today proceed let illustr short exampl draw latest academ research watcher often advis central bank pursu price stabil doubt sound advic inde point import principl name monetari polici thus monetari polici maker ultim determin rate inflat implic whether price stabil maintain view offic eurotow advic although sound seem relev use like colleagu govern council awar respons confer upon treati collect act word deed pursu primari object mainten price stabil remind respons harm neither help seek practic guidanc take monetari polici decis serv achiev object respons advic natur respons bring topic comment morn enhanc monetari analysi aspect monetari polici subject intens debat past decad fora wonder whether debat generat heat light opinion becom polaris watcher argu monetari analysi irrelev even mislead watcher argu adopt monetari target interest rate gear achiev certain rate money growth observ ecb fail provid practic guidanc conduct monetari analysi interpret monetari develop use policymak staff ecb eurosystem fill breach today describ result work use polici deliber start outlin number key empir regular relev monetari analysi empir featur remain robust past two hundr year continu today provid simpl yet power illustr econom principl under monetari polici strategi tackl crucial issu appli monetari policymak name operationalis particular real time use monetari analysi monetari polici purpos briefli review perform monetari analysi recent year sketch avenu current pursu enhanc monetari analysi futur hope outlin agenda way act catalyst engag watcher academ wider research effort deepen broaden understand monetari develop implic under institut framework monetari polici europ neutral monetari polici longer run monetari polici cannot affect real variabl long horizon horizon monetari polici determin nomin variabl notabl price level therefor rate inflat cautious use word context experi demonstr consider econom social cost incur inflat run control price stabil therefor primari object ecb govern council assign respons conduct monetari polici pursuit goal much consensus among economist academ practition central banker sinc monetari polici ultim determin nomin variabl crucial conduct within nomin framework central bank look exclus real variabl run risk miss under nomin trend trend may play littl role determin inflat one two year ahead persist lead gradual last drift inflat away level consist price stabil crosscheck cyclic analysi focus demand cost dynam assess longerterm nomin trend therefor key reflect ecb monetari polici strategi beg question nomin variabl use assess longerterm nomin trend monetari develop natur candid central bank ultim monopoli provid base money practic recogn empir question old adag say pictur worth thousand word figur show close robust relationship trend compon inflat money growth long period select countri norway sinc australia sinc unit kingdom sinc unit state sinc past two centuri upsw downsw trend money growth almost alway follow year later swing direct trend inflat import point stress figur make clear addit evid countri confirm recent period exhibit respect differ whatsoev compar distant past inde focus euro area past thirti year broad empir regular emerg basi pictur wish stress three crucial point first relationship trend money growth trend inflat remain intact past two centuri across varieti differ monetari polici regim furthermor alreadi stress data recent year exhibit regular includ euro area see figur suggest featur data hardwir deep structur economi thus empir ground relationship monetari growth inflat appear invulner wellknown luca critiqu word observ empir relationship structur natur disappear polici shift one regim anoth second figur demonstr contrari recent literatur relationship money growth inflat remain strong even countri low rate averag inflat none four countri shown figur endur extrem event hyperinfl twentieth centuri yet relationship endur final crucial care analysi seri plot figur reveal develop trend money growth lead develop inflat rough year therefor analyz monetari develop particular identifi surg trend money growth central bank implement polici serv contain inflationari pressur stem under nomin trend identifi monetari analysi becom manifest inflat three crucial robust featur data motiv ecb monetari analysi determin pursu practic discuss greater detail result operationalis appli polici make context allow first make number comment relationship framework socal standard newkeynesian model current hold sway mani academ discuss monetari polici model accord meaning role money although model replic longrun relationship money growth inflat see data replic one crucial featur relationship name lead trend money growth trend inflat standard newkeynesian model workhors much recent academ investig monetari polici trend money growth move contemporan trend inflat even lag rather lead year peculiar properti new keynesian model standard academ literatur odd empir evid last two hundr year shown figur point worth emphas suppos observ strong upward trend monetari growth basi standard new keynesian model would signal subsequ upsid risk inflat analysi monetari develop base model would therefor inevit behind curv unhelp polici maker perspect howev realiti everi persist upsurg trend money growth follow upsurg trend inflat featur data remain broad unchang across various radic differ monetari polici regim abil standard new keynesian model replic key featur data drive structur assum monetari aggreg play pure residu role word money influenc variabl influenc way accept model intrins logic ought accept key implic money special role monetari polici analysi logic seem flaw reflect ongo research ecb staff return later mani reason monetari variabl may play activ role transmiss monetari polici thus serv determin least part macroeconom outcom rather respond moreov research offer reason monetari develop may lead inflat impli data wors model artifici trivial role monetari analysi artifici sens money margin basi ex ant assumpt rather basi anyth observ data within standard newkeynesian framework movement inflat persist beyond busi cycl explain result variat central bank inflat object polici advic stem framework admonit alreadi mention surg inflat like saw global thus seen someth desir central banker time analysi quit ring true plausibl explan even wellintent central banker sometim make mistak seek avoid mistak past today polici maker seek robust earli indic upward trend inflat empir evid point money among foremost indic monetari analysi therefor remain crucial credibl pursuit price stabil monetari polici decis necessarili taken real time basi data model avail moment decis context uncertainti data model abound stylis relat trend money growth trend inflat shown figur cannot use direct polici maker practic central bank monetari analysi must therefor form assess current under trend rate monetari expans real time order draw infer impli futur trend rate inflat approach embrac robust empir relationship alreadi discuss operationalis employ pragmat way apparatus need develop order translat robust under empir regular practic guidanc interest rate decis choic made measur money follow assess made measur may affect temporari factor caus deviat under trend rate monetari expans requir broadbas approach embodi three main element first rather focus exclus develop headlin m growth relat eurosystem refer valu ecb monetari analysi sometim erron characteris broadbas approach monetari analysi draw fullest possibl set monetari financi econom inform compon counterpart sector composit m monetari credit aggreg studi detail conjunct financi flow deriv financi account financi market develop yield assess implic monetari condit assess like central analysi come month given recent event broader macroeconom develop data also assess extent inform portfolio financ spend decis influenc monetari credit dynam second broadbas approach employ suit empir model various type includ money demand equat time seri indic model structur general equilibrium model model use explain develop money credit variabl identifi unusu innov variabl assess possibl implic price develop broader macroeconom financi outlook third modelbas analysi complement use inform judgement build particular eurosystem assess structur evolut financi monetari sector economi basi detail analysi chang bank financi sector ecb staff identifi product technic innov like impact monetari credit dynam embodi implic overal assess monetari data pragmat tool employ within structur analyt framework ensur intern coher divers constitu element comprehens analysi consist time specif tool use deriv best real time assess current under rate monetari expans basi empir regular discuss robust link longerterm inflationari trend within framework extract policyrelev inform contain monetari develop key ensur trend inflat remain consist price stabil certain experi ecb past ½ year illustr allow refer briefli two import exampl recent year highlight broadbas approach monetari analysi work practic like one see episod two big call monetari analysi make first year monetari union interpret two surg monetari growth took place mid earli mid end first period attribut strong broad money growth observ late portfolio shift liquid monetari asset time heighten econom financi uncertainti portfolio shift seen temporari surg m growth thus view unrepres under rate monetari expans rather benign term outlook price stabil strong headlin m growth therefor impedi cut interest rate took place second period surg monetari growth attribut strong credit growth driven prevail favour financ condit turn support financi innov eas suppli bank credit dynam view repres under rate monetari expans thus seen potenti concern outlook price stabil emphasis presid past intensif concern cours one factor under govern council decis commenc withdraw monetari polici accommod decemb consider benefit hindsight real time judgement under two big call broad prove correct implement singl monetari polici basi ecb strategi prove success inflat rate euro area brought maintain low level histor standard crucial ecb success manag stabilis longerterm privat inflat expect histor low level illustr exampl answer question whether monetari analysi contribut success monetari polici ecb clear yes albeit weight vari time past success mean mean afford complac quot winston churchil success final decis maker success past suffici guarante success futur past success may even danger might lead fallaci assumpt medium longerterm price stabil taken grant free central bank concentr sole smooth inflat output around secur stabl steadyst thus import stay continu vigil period success vigil exercis identif risk price stabil well tool use identifi risk tool like chang time exampl financi innov may chang transmiss monetari polici appropri measur monetari liquid case monetari analysi see need pursu work along four avenu order stay fit challeng futur first work requir money demand model euro area standard specif embodi convent determin money demand cannot account monetari develop recent year natur avenu work therefor refin extend money demand model improv understand recent behaviour monetari aggreg context must recognis adequ measur money may evolv time take account chang financi landscap must continu check construct question statist measur money monetari liquid order refin assess policyrelev under monetari dynam tie aggreg fix money hold sector tie fix asset class number exercis pursu regard sector analysi money demand particular promis especi given increas import nonmonetari financi institut monetari develop emerg recent year part consequ financi innov loan securitis given differ transmiss channel differ money hold sector deepen current analysi respect like increas understand aggreg money demand moreov includ wealth determin money demand general place demand money context broader privat portfolio decis promis ongo line work turn requir better understand opportun cost hold money impact risk uncertainti portfolio choic second synthesis summaris inform deriv ecb broadbas monetari analysi emphasis use monetari analysi guid polici decis aim mainten price stabil prove use construct moneybas inflat risk indic help summaris easytounderstandway inflationari deflationari risk identifi broadbas multidimension therefor necessarili somewhat complex monetari analysi ongo work aim improv transpar clariti robust indic one promis approach employ bayesian techniqu allow introduc judgment adjust indic structur manner attempt embodi larg data set tool factor model analysi also underway adopt techniqu introduc number methodolog approach commonplac econom analysi monetari analysi therebi seek benefit experi gain third continu forefront introduc activ role money credit structur general equilibrium model therebi extend standard new keynesian framework discuss earlier address specif critiqu framework rais approach allow impact financi friction factor cyclic behaviour economi embodi current benchmark academ model assess extend standard model way least start develop framework begin replic key regular data mani earlier comment reli particular robust endur lead trend money growth trend inflat fourth import deepen framework crosscheck inform analysi stem monetari econom analys crosscheck ultim necessarili respons polici maker take singl interest rate decis basi sever input build tool method enhanc deepen process desir yet far develop comprehens encompass model economi embodi real monetari financi factor interact among consequ adopt diversifi approach analys data crosscheck among various analys necessari success polici design number promis avenu pursu integr sector account euro area provid one statist framework compar econom monetari data import relationship monetari credit dynam one hand asset price one receiv increas attent recent research ecb shown monetari dynam influenc asset price thus also macroeconom dynam confid pursu doubtless demand analyt research agenda success improv work polici maker allow us continu state full confid money matter monetari polici make overal experienc challeng face recent year current see singl convinc theoret framework replac success two pillar strategi ecb let alon practic apparatus could appli real time polici make promin role money provid explicit nomin framework within under persist nomin trend economi identifi address even busi cycl point inflat pressur cross check econom monetari analys provid robust polici decis ensur varieti model view inflat process entertain therebi avoid relianc one modelspecif view ration framework remain current best possibl way guarante money accord appropri relev recognis appli polici maker practition transpar last way avoid temptat use money opportunist suit background question whether monitor money credit develop strike polici maker especi current financi market circumst analyst link financi market odd demonstr ecb lag behind latest academ work monetari analysi monetari polici rather mainstream academ work lag realiti current agenda ongo research enhanc monetari analysi demonstr ecb vanguard develop tool conduct new enlighten monetari analysi underpin strategi invit today join us quest togeth pioneer develop new tool monetari analysi requir address rapid chang econom financi environ thank attent adalid r c detken liquid shock asset price boombust cycl ecb work paper benati luca money inflat new keynesian model european central bank work paper forthcomingbruggeman g cambaméndez b fischer j sousa structur filter monetari analysi inflationari movement money euro area ecb work paper christiano l r motto m rostagno shock structur polici ea us forthcom journal econom dynam control christiano lawrenc j fitzgerald terri bandpass filter intern econom review pp degrauw paul polan magdalena inflat alway everywher monetari phenomenon scandinavian journal econom detken c f smet asset price boom monetari polici publish horst siebert ed macroeconom polici world economi springer berlin ecb interpret monetari develop sinc mid ecb month bulletin juli ecb monetari analysi real time ecb month bulletin octob fischer b m lenza h pill l reichlin money monetari polici ecb experi forthcom role money money monetari polici st centuri ed beyer l reichlin luca robert e jr econometr polici evalu critiqu carnegierochest confer seri public polici pp luca robert e jr nobel lectur monetari neutral journal polit economi pp luca robert e jr remark deliv monetari polici journey theori practic ecb colloquium held honour otmar iss frankfurt main march mccallum b two fallaci concern central bank independ american econom review paper proceed vol nelson edward sluggish inflat optimis model busi cycl journal monetari econom pp uhlig h discuss paper monetari polici stock market boombust cycl l christiano r motto m rostagno money import monetari polici m woodford th ecb central bank confer novemb see http www ecb europa eueventspdfconferencescbc discussion_uhlig pdfvon landesberg j sector money demand model euro area base common set determin ecb work paper figur trend compon inflat money growth sinc gold standard era norway australia unit kingdom unit state sourc benati figur trend compon inflat money growth sinc euro sourc benati draft prepar l benati b fischer substant contribut h pill m rostagno help comment j p vidal acknowledg mccallum uhlig trend compon money growth inflat extract via standard statist filter see christiano fitzgerald defin slowmov compon two seri see benati bruggeman et al see luca de grauw polan exampl state relat inflat money growth lowinfl countri weak absent shown benati section base estim new keynesian model standard specif demand real balanc sever altern configur paramet monetari polici rule problem new keynesian model point nelson academ profess move away money recent year essenti ignor see ecb ecb see von landesberg see fischer et al see christiano et al see detken smet aladid detken reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en