Benoît Cœuré: Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union,23-09-2012,European Central Bank,ECB,3990,"<p>Mr Governor, Mr Consul General, Mr Vice President of the Board of the Palestinian Institute for Fiscal Policy, Deputy Ministers, Heads of Public Administration, Directors General, Ladies and Gentlemen, [1]It is a great honour for me to speak at the Palestinian Public finance Institute. The establishment of the Institute marks an important step in the development of the economic governance framework in the Palestinian Territories. I wish this project every success. It relies on the commitment of so many dedicated people in the Ministry of Finance and in Adetef. As Jean Monnet, one of the founding fathers of the European Union, once put it: “Nothing is possible without men; nothing is lasting without institutions."" His words related to Europe but in fact they are relevant worldwide.The Middle East and Europe have always had close ties. They are both part of the Mediterranean region, which is economically and financially interlinked. And currently, both are experiencing an institutional transformation. In this part of the world it has come to be called the ‘Arab Spring’. In Europe, it is the consequence of an economic and financial crisis resulting from weaknesses in the architecture of Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). Institution-building takes time. Even though European integration started over six decades ago, the building of those institutions remains a work in progress. But to understand the challenges that Europe is currently facing, we should take a step back and look briefly at the origins of the Europe’s integration process. I will then share with you my thoughts on what I believe to be the main shortcomings in the current EMU framework. Finally, I will give you my views on the short- and longer-term measures that the euro area should take to overcome the crisis.In 1945, Europe emerged from the Second World War as a devastated continent, economically broken and politically divided. But even during the darkest days of the war, there were some Europeans who were convinced that Europe would eventually overcome its divisions and unite in peace. One of them was Robert Schuman, a French statesman, who in 1950 made a declaration that became a rallying cry: he proposed that Europe should aim for closer economic and political cooperation. The declaration was well received, also by West Germany. This was a crucial point because Germany and France had been rivals in a century-long quest for dominance over the European continent. The Schuman Declaration paved the way for a new era of peaceful cooperation between the two nations, as well as with other countries. A new type of Europe began to emerge from the wasteland of World War II. What was about to take shape was indeed “revolutionary” – because the fathers of a united Europe moved beyond the concept of the nation-state with a jealously guarded sovereignty. They placed coal and steel production – the two industries which were crucial to the war effort – under a new supranational authority. Six European countries – France, West Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg – took this first and important step towards closer cooperation in 1951. A process towards creating durable conditions for peace in Europe had been set in motion. The six founding countries came to realise that there were substantial benefits in closer cooperation and agreed to deepen it further. In 1957, they signed the Treaty of Rome, which created a customs union and established the European Economic Community. Its overall aim was to promote harmonious economic development, raise living standards and develop a common market. However, the founding fathers of Europe saw European integration as more than just an exercise in economic cooperation. They shared a larger vision for the future of Europe. Thus, in the Treaty’s preamble, the signatories committed to lay the foundations for an ‘ever closer union’ among the peoples of Europe. This commitment has become the leitmotif of the continent’s integration. Indeed, the initial group of six countries that started this process has now expanded to become a group of 27 countries, with another one, Croatia, joining next year. Others are currently negotiating to become members. Proposals for deeper monetary integration date back to the Werner Report of 1970 and gained political momentum in the second half of the 1980s. At that time, Member States were taking steps towards establishing a single market. This included also the liberalisation of capital movements. As a consequence, Europe became captive to what Robert Mundell and other economists have called the ‘impossible trinity’ – in other words, the impossibility of simultaneously achieving the three goals of financial liberalisation, exchange rate stability, and national monetary policy. One of the three goals had to be abandoned. The choice as to which one became increasingly clear after the failed attempt to secure exchange rate stability through the Exchange Rate Mechanism. [2] Given that a single market, including capital account liberalisation, had been a stated goal since the Treaty of Rome, and given that exchange rate stability was needed to reap the full benefits of the single market, Member States agreed to renounce monetary sovereignty. Moreover, sharing a currency makes sense for countries with close trade ties. This is especially true for the euro area countries which, since the start of EMU, have conducted almost half of their overall trade among themselves.The Maastricht Treaty, which was signed in 1992, made monetary policy a euro area competence but left economic and fiscal policies under the responsibility of national governments. The concept of economic union relied essentially on the single market, with few binding constraints on economic and fiscal policies. Over time, this turned out to be a significant institutional shortcoming.Moreover, the transfer of a core sovereign prerogative like monetary policy to the supranational level is a highly political act which entails important political commitments for the future. In particular, the participating countries must undertake to conduct fiscal and economic policies in a way that allows monetary union to work properly. This is a responsibility that the euro area countries share, a responsibility that governments have to fulfil vis-à-vis their peers and vis-à-vis their own citizens.Seen from this perspective, it is clear that the concept of EMU goes beyond economic and monetary integration. Let me add that the single market itself has a political dimension as the proper functioning of markets requires strong institutional underpinnings, such as enforcement of contracts, consumer protection and competition policy. It has mandated the creation of a federal executive (the European Commission), legislative (the European Parliament), and judiciary (the EU Court of Justice). The creation of the single currency is an act of further political integration. Under the Maastricht Treaty the European Economic Community became the European Union, a proper reflection of the fact that the ultimate aim – the finalité, as we say in French – of the European project is more than just economic. The EU is a real, albeit limited, political union.Let me now review briefly what I consider to be the three most important shortcomings of the Maastricht framework – the ones on which we need to achieve progress urgently: i) stronger fiscal institutions; ii) real convergence across the euro area; and iii) the establishment of a financial market union.The Maastricht Treaty created the European Central Bank (ECB), which took up its monetary operations on 1 January 1999. The monetary dimension of the Maastricht Treaty has worked very well. Since the start of EMU, the ECB has kept annual inflation rates on average very close to 2%.As regards economic policies however, no new institutions or competences were created. The Maastricht Treaty includes a general clause that economic policies should be treated as a matter of common concern and coordinated within the EU Council of Ministers. Member States are also required to run their economic policies in accordance with ECB’s primary goal of maintaining price stability. The underlying philosophy was to prevent what economists call “fiscal dominance”: namely, that the misguided policies of governments force the hand of the central bank, and hinder it from pursuing its objective: safeguarding price stability. However, surveillance of economic policies rested chiefly on non-binding guidelines and recommendations. In 1997, this architecture was complemented by the Stability and Growth Pact, which foresaw binding commitments to fiscal rules, backed up by sanctions. These were however not enforced when cases of fiscal slippage arose later on, and not backed by sufficiently strong national fiscal institutions. Outside the realm of fiscal policies, coordination was sought but no specific rules were foreseen. This is another weakness of the Maastricht framework: the absence of a surveillance mechanism for the timely detection of macroeconomic imbalances and their resolution. Those countries with a history of elevated inflation rates and exchange rate devaluations benefited, at the start of EMU, from unprecedented low levels of real interest rates. Over time, these led to wage and price increases that undermined competitiveness. This development showed up in increasingly deteriorating current account positions as well as in bubbles, particularly in the financial and real estate sectors, fuelled by capital flowing from countries with current account surpluses. When the bubbles burst after the global financial crisis of 2007, governments stepped in to support growth and some of them were called to rescue ailing banks. In this way, private indebtedness turned into public indebtedness, with disastrous fiscal consequences even for countries that had run fiscal surpluses prior to the crisis, such as Ireland and Spain, and even more for those that had not, such as Greece.A further shortcoming of the Maastricht framework was the inability to deal with what is now being called the ‘bank-sovereign nexus’. When systemically important banks run into trouble, governments are expected to step in and provide fiscal support to contain the spillovers. Beyond that, banks are typically the largest holders of government debt from their respective sovereigns. These ties, or nexus, between banks and their governments can lead to a dangerous downward spiralAnother effect of this downward spiral, under way since the euro area crisis erupted in 2010, is the fragmentation of capital markets. The bank-sovereign nexus has led to a situation whereby cross-border lending of banks has gone down significantly, as banks retreat more and more to their domestic markets, encouraged by their shareholders and, sometimes, by national banking supervisors. The crisis is undermining a key achievement of the euro, the integration of capital markets. A fundamental problem of the Maastricht Treaty was its over-reliance on the assumption that market discipline and peer pressure would provide sufficient incentives for national policy-makers to conduct sound fiscal and economic policies. This did not prove to be the case. As Jacques de Larosière, the former IMF Managing Director, once remarked, what was supposed to be a system of ‘peer pressure’ too often turned into a system of ‘peer concessions’ or ‘peer arrangements’.On the whole, the Maastricht framework proved unable to deal adequately with the high degree of economic and financial integration in the euro area. It was not fully understood that sharing a currency means much more than sharing the same monetary policy. It is a commitment to ensuring sound fiscal, economic and financial conditions. Euro area countries largely overlooked the substantial spillover effects that national policy decisions would have on their fellow countries in EMU euro area partners. The ongoing crisis has brought these shortcomings into sharp focus.Let me now turn to Europe’s policy response to the crisis. The EMU framework relies on a strict separation between monetary policy on the one hand, and fiscal and economic policies on the other. The monetary policy function is carried out by the ECB under a clear mandate: maintaining price stability over the medium term in the euro area. To achieve this goal, the ECB has been given full political and operational independence. Since the start of the crisis, the ECB has reacted forcefully. Since 2008, it has lowered its policy rate from 4.25% to 0.75% now. However, the increasing fragmentation of capital markets which I described above, and which sometimes has led to a complete drying-up of certain financial market segments, has impaired the monetary transmission channel in the euro area. Monetary policy signals are no longer being transmitted properly to the real sector. The divergence in bank funding conditions is certainly a key factor, in addition to the country-specific economic situation, in explaining the differences in bank lending rates to non-financial corporations across euro area countries. These divergences are leading to a weakening of the pass-through of monetary policy decisions in some euro area countries. For example, among the five largest euro area countries, the maximum difference between short-term lending rates to non-financial corporations (for short-term loans over €1 million) reached more than 100 basis points in recent months. Across all euro area countries, the dispersion of such lending rates is greater now than it has ever been. In other words, conventional monetary policy has lost its effectiveness in some parts of the euro area. For the ECB, the singleness of its monetary policy has been at stake.Against this background, the ECB has resorted to so-called non-standard measures to ensure the effective transmission of its monetary policy across the euro area. Without a properly functioning transmission channel for its monetary policy, the ECB’s capability to maintain price stability is at risk. The ECB has modified its allotment procedures and its collateral policy. It has also lowered the rate of the minimum reserve requirements and introduced very longer-term refinancing operations.Importantly, the ECB has also decided to resort to outright purchases of bonds on secondary markets. Following the so-called Securities Market Programme, which has now been terminated, the Governing Council of the ECB agreed at its meeting on 6 September on the modalities for undertaking Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs) in secondary markets for sovereign bonds in the euro area. The OMTs will enable the ECB to address severe distortions in government bond markets which originate from, in particular, fears on the part of investors of the reversibility of the euro. Monetary union is sometimes misunderstood as an exchange rate system which the participating countries can enter and leave, as was the case with the ERM. Such a perception of reversibility would imply that, ultimately, one euro would not be worth the same in different euro area countries. In other words, the single currency would no longer be single. This perception is fundamentally flawed. Let me be very clear: the Maastricht Treaty refers to the ‘irrevocable fixing of exchange rates’ when a country enters monetary union. The euro is irrevocable.With the OMTs, under appropriate conditions, EMU will now have a fully effective backstop to avoid destructive scenarios with potentially severe consequences for price stability in the euro area. A necessary condition for the OMTs is that the country concerned adheres to strict and effective conditionality attached to an appropriate programme under the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). IMF involvement will be sought for the design and monitoring of conditionality. The OMTs are an instrument in the ECB’s toolbox to help it fulfil its mandate, maintaining price stability. They will be conducive to the monetary authority restoring its power to control credit conditions in the euro area and, through that channel, inflation in the medium term.Ultimately, however, the current crisis is the result of the lack of incentives in the Maastricht Treaty to pursue sound fiscal, economic and financial market policies. This can only be amended by the Member States, not by the ECB. The key to resolving the crisis thus lies first and foremost with governments, individually and jointly.Since the start of the crisis, the Member States have adopted a number of important measures to strengthen the institutional framework of EMU. A procedure for the surveillance of excessive macroeconomic imbalances has been established in order to detect and correct divergences at an early stage. In the case of non-adherence to agreed fiscal and economic rules, sanctions will be applied in a more automatic manner to reduce the potential for political interference and delay in the process. Further improvements are currently under consideration, such as the mandatory submission of draft national budgets to the group of euro area finance ministers – the so-called ‘Eurogroup’ – for vetting before those budgets are submitted to national parliaments for adoption. The vetting should ensure that divergences from the fiscal rules can be identified and corrected at a very early stage.Moreover, earlier this year, 25 out of 27 EU Member States signed the Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance in the Economic and Monetary Union, more generally known as the Fiscal Compact. The Compact further improves the EMU framework by introducing a cyclically adjusted balanced-budget rule which the participating countries need to transpose into national legislation.Finally, a temporary crisis resolution mechanism was created, the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), which will remain active until July 2013 despite being replaced by a permanent organisation this autumn, the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). With a combined maximum firepower of €700 billion, these two mechanisms will help to build effective firewalls to stem contagion from the crisis. What has been achieved so far is impressive. Prior to the crisis, very few would have expected that Member States would reach a consensus on such fundamental changes in the way EMU works. But these changes are not enough. EMU now needs a longer-term vision to confront its challenges. In order to restore confidence, policy-makers in the euro area need to resolutely push ahead with fiscal consolidation, structural reforms to enhance competitiveness and European institution-building. Recently, the President of the European Council, in close cooperation with the Presidents of the Eurogroup, the European Commission and the European Central Bank, put forward proposals for a genuine EMU. The four Presidents are proposing that a genuine EMU should be built on integrated frameworks for budgetary policies, economic policies and financial market policies, which in turn must be underpinned by greater democratic legitimacy and accountability. When we look at the options to establish budgetary policies in a monetary union, and exclude any uncoordinated conduct of fiscal policy by Member States, three possible models come to mind. First, there could be a fully-fledged fiscal union, with a central budget and federal debt issuance. It is not on the cards in the short run as important steps would need to be taken to establish the necessary euro area-wide political legitimacy and governance. The second model would involve sharing sovereignty on national fiscal policies, with reciprocal control of public expenditures serving as a basis for common debt issuance by governments. Such reciprocal control would also require strong democratic legitimacy, involving national parliaments. The third model would only rely on unqualified adherence to fiscal discipline by Member States, without risk-sharing.None of these three models alone is possible in the short run. There will be a combination of the three. The desirable mix has to be decided upon by the people of Europe with the appropriate democratic checks. EMU is a unique construct, tailored to European specificities, and it need not resemble any existing federation. Let me give some examples. First and foremost, euro area countries should regain their ability to save money for a rainy day by adhering to their fiscal commitments in the new framework of the Fiscal Compact. They have already agreed to limited mutual insurance through the EFSF/ESM. A centralised fiscal capacity could be considered too, provided it is not the basis for permanent transfers but is used to promote market integration and better resilience to economic shocks. For instance, a euro area unemployment insurance scheme could be set up, which would support much-needed cross-country labour mobility. Indeed, an integrated economic policy framework is needed to boost economic integration and ensure that unsustainable policies do not jeopardise the stability of EMU. The framework should provide for a better enforcement of commitments to structural reforms, i.e. measures to increase a country’s competitiveness and its capacity to adjust to economic shocks. Structural reforms make EMU more robust.In addition, an integrated financial market framework is required in order to break the bank-sovereign nexus that threatens financial integration. This is another important element to make market-based risk sharing work effectively. While many euro area banks have benefited from the single currency, and significantly expanded their European business activities, they are still supervised at national level. Financial fragmentation, as I described above, has led to the perception that banks’ liabilities, even though they are nominally the same, are in fact different from one euro area country to another. This is not acceptable: the currency union has thus to be complemented by a banking union. At their summit in June, EU Member States entered into a political commitment, and the European Commission is now proposing to create a single supervisory mechanism for banks in the euro area and to entrust this task to the ECB. This single supervisory mechanism should be implemented in a way that does not compromise the ECB’s independence and does not constrain monetary policy. It should be complemented by a single regime to wind down failed banks and by a single resolution fund at euro area level.Finally, building a deeper EMU requires a strengthening of democratic legitimacy and accountability. The people of Europe will only accept a further pooling of competences at European level if European policy-makers are subject to high standards of accountability. The European Parliament, whose representatives are directly elected by citizens, already plays a central role in holding the ECB and other EU institutions to account. As a consequence of deeper economic and political integration in EMU, the euro area will become, in my view, more and more a ‘political space’ in its own right and, as such, it will require proper euro area accountability mechanisms. Political legitimacy is vital to build popular support for further integration.Ladies and Gentlemen,When Robert Schuman drafted the declaration that started the European integration process, he predicted that “Europe will not be made all at once, or according to a single plan. It will be built through concrete achievements which first create a de facto solidarity”. When looking at Europe’s progress since the Second World War and the step-by-step building of EMU, we can indeed see that what holds Europe together, what has been its engine, and the reason for its success, is the notion of solidarity. Solidarity is sometimes narrowed down to mean one-way support, from donor to recipient. Of course this has always been a key consideration in the European construction. The EU structural funds, which go to Europe’s poorer regions, are a very tangible measure of this kind of solidarity. Likewise, the European crisis mechanisms EFSF and ESM are a symbol of euro area solidarity. Solidarity is not just a catch-phrase in EMU; it is essential for all.Let me come back to Schuman’s insight that “ concrete achievements first create a de facto solidarity”. We have reached a point in the history of Europe where de facto solidarity has created a need for concrete achievements. In recent years we have made impressive progress in putting EMU’s architecture on a sounder footing. The euro area countries now need to continue on their path of policy reform and to strengthen their governance. The report of the four Presidents in October will provide further guidance in this regard. If these efforts are maintained, I am confident that the crisis will be overcome.Thank you for your attention.[1]I would like to thank Stefan Huemer for his contributions to the speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions expressed herein.[2]In the late 1970s, European countries agreed on closer exchange rate cooperation by setting standard fluctuation bands of plus/minus 2.25% for their bilateral exchange rates. This Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) functioned well for a decade or so but it ultimately fell apart due to the divergences in the economic and fiscal policies of the participating countries. Speculative attacks ensued and ultimately triggered a crisis that forced two large countries – the United Kingdom and Italy – to leave the ERM in 1992.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",mr governor mr consul general mr vice presid board palestinian institut fiscal polici deputi minist head public administr director general ladi gentlemen great honour speak palestinian public financ institut establish institut mark import step develop econom govern framework palestinian territori wish project everi success reli commit mani dedic peopl ministri financ adetef jean monnet one found father european union put noth possibl without men noth last without institut word relat europ fact relev worldwid middl east europ alway close tie part mediterranean region econom financi interlink current experienc institut transform part world come call arab spring europ consequ econom financi crisi result weak architectur europ econom monetari union emu institutionbuild take time even though european integr start six decad ago build institut remain work progress understand challeng europ current face take step back look briefli origin europ integr process share thought believ main shortcom current emu framework final give view short longerterm measur euro area take overcom crisi europ emerg second world war devast contin econom broken polit divid even darkest day war european convinc europ would eventu overcom divis unit peac one robert schuman french statesman made declar becam ralli cri propos europ aim closer econom polit cooper declar well receiv also west germani crucial point germani franc rival centurylong quest domin european contin schuman declar pave way new era peac cooper two nation well countri new type europ began emerg wasteland world war ii take shape inde revolutionari father unit europ move beyond concept nationst jealous guard sovereignti place coal steel product two industri crucial war effort new supran author six european countri franc west germani itali netherland belgium luxembourg took first import step toward closer cooper process toward creat durabl condit peac europ set motion six found countri came realis substanti benefit closer cooper agre deepen sign treati rome creat custom union establish european econom communiti overal aim promot harmoni econom develop rais live standard develop common market howev found father europ saw european integr exercis econom cooper share larger vision futur europ thus treati preambl signatori commit lay foundat ever closer union among peopl europ commit becom leitmotif contin integr inde initi group six countri start process expand becom group countri anoth one croatia join next year other current negoti becom member propos deeper monetari integr date back werner report gain polit momentum second half time member state take step toward establish singl market includ also liberalis capit movement consequ europ becam captiv robert mundel economist call imposs triniti word imposs simultan achiev three goal financi liberalis exchang rate stabil nation monetari polici one three goal abandon choic one becam increas clear fail attempt secur exchang rate stabil exchang rate mechan given singl market includ capit account liberalis state goal sinc treati rome given exchang rate stabil need reap full benefit singl market member state agre renounc monetari sovereignti moreov share currenc make sens countri close trade tie especi true euro area countri sinc start emu conduct almost half overal trade among maastricht treati sign made monetari polici euro area compet left econom fiscal polici respons nation govern concept econom union reli essenti singl market bind constraint econom fiscal polici time turn signific institut shortcom moreov transfer core sovereign prerog like monetari polici supran level high polit act entail import polit commit futur particular particip countri must undertak conduct fiscal econom polici way allow monetari union work proper respons euro area countri share respons govern fulfil visàvi peer visàvi citizen seen perspect clear concept emu goe beyond econom monetari integr let add singl market polit dimens proper function market requir strong institut underpin enforc contract consum protect competit polici mandat creation feder execut european commiss legisl european parliament judiciari eu court justic creation singl currenc act polit integr maastricht treati european econom communiti becam european union proper reflect fact ultim aim finalité say french european project econom eu real albeit limit polit union let review briefli consid three import shortcom maastricht framework one need achiev progress urgent stronger fiscal institut ii real converg across euro area iii establish financi market union maastricht treati creat european central bank ecb took monetari oper januari monetari dimens maastricht treati work well sinc start emu ecb kept annual inflat rate averag close regard econom polici howev new institut compet creat maastricht treati includ general claus econom polici treat matter common concern coordin within eu council minist member state also requir run econom polici accord ecb primari goal maintain price stabil under philosophi prevent economist call fiscal domin name misguid polici govern forc hand central bank hinder pursu object safeguard price stabil howev surveil econom polici rest chiefli nonbind guidelin recommend architectur complement stabil growth pact foresaw bind commit fiscal rule back sanction howev enforc case fiscal slippag aros later back suffici strong nation fiscal institut outsid realm fiscal polici coordin sought specif rule foreseen anoth weak maastricht framework absenc surveil mechan time detect macroeconom imbal resolut countri histori elev inflat rate exchang rate devalu benefit start emu unpreced low level real interest rate time led wage price increas undermin competit develop show increas deterior current account posit well bubbl particular financi real estat sector fuell capit flow countri current account surplus bubbl burst global financi crisi govern step support growth call rescu ail bank way privat indebted turn public indebted disastr fiscal consequ even countri run fiscal surplus prior crisi ireland spain even greec shortcom maastricht framework inabl deal call banksovereign nexus system import bank run troubl govern expect step provid fiscal support contain spillov beyond bank typic largest holder govern debt respect sovereign tie nexus bank govern lead danger downward spiralanoth effect downward spiral way sinc euro area crisi erupt fragment capit market banksovereign nexus led situat wherebi crossbord lend bank gone signific bank retreat domest market encourag sharehold sometim nation bank supervisor crisi undermin key achiev euro integr capit market fundament problem maastricht treati overreli assumpt market disciplin peer pressur would provid suffici incent nation policymak conduct sound fiscal econom polici prove case jacqu de larosièr former imf manag director remark suppos system peer pressur often turn system peer concess peer arrang whole maastricht framework prove unabl deal adequ high degre econom financi integr euro area fulli understood share currenc mean much share monetari polici commit ensur sound fiscal econom financi condit euro area countri larg overlook substanti spillov effect nation polici decis would fellow countri emu euro area partner ongo crisi brought shortcom sharp focus let turn europ polici respons crisi emu framework reli strict separ monetari polici one hand fiscal econom polici monetari polici function carri ecb clear mandat maintain price stabil medium term euro area achiev goal ecb given full polit oper independ sinc start crisi ecb react forc sinc lower polici rate howev increas fragment capit market describ sometim led complet dryingup certain financi market segment impair monetari transmiss channel euro area monetari polici signal longer transmit proper real sector diverg bank fund condit certain key factor addit countryspecif econom situat explain differ bank lend rate nonfinanci corpor across euro area countri diverg lead weaken passthrough monetari polici decis euro area countri exampl among five largest euro area countri maximum differ shortterm lend rate nonfinanci corpor shortterm loan million reach basi point recent month across euro area countri dispers lend rate greater ever word convent monetari polici lost effect part euro area ecb singl monetari polici stake background ecb resort socal nonstandard measur ensur effect transmiss monetari polici across euro area without proper function transmiss channel monetari polici ecb capabl maintain price stabil risk ecb modifi allot procedur collater polici also lower rate minimum reserv requir introduc longerterm refinanc oper import ecb also decid resort outright purchas bond secondari market follow socal secur market programm termin govern council ecb agre meet septemb modal undertak outright monetari transact omt secondari market sovereign bond euro area omt enabl ecb address sever distort govern bond market origin particular fear part investor revers euro monetari union sometim misunderstood exchang rate system particip countri enter leav case erm percept revers would impli ultim one euro would worth differ euro area countri word singl currenc would longer singl percept fundament flaw let clear maastricht treati refer irrevoc fix exchang rate countri enter monetari union euro irrevoc omt appropri condit emu fulli effect backstop avoid destruct scenario potenti sever consequ price stabil euro area necessari condit omt countri concern adher strict effect condit attach appropri programm european financi stabil facil efsf european stabil mechan esm imf involv sought design monitor condit omt instrument ecb toolbox help fulfil mandat maintain price stabil conduc monetari author restor power control credit condit euro area channel inflat medium term ultim howev current crisi result lack incent maastricht treati pursu sound fiscal econom financi market polici amend member state ecb key resolv crisi thus lie first foremost govern individu joint sinc start crisi member state adopt number import measur strengthen institut framework emu procedur surveil excess macroeconom imbal establish order detect correct diverg earli stage case nonadher agre fiscal econom rule sanction appli automat manner reduc potenti polit interfer delay process improv current consider mandatori submiss draft nation budget group euro area financ minist socal eurogroup vet budget submit nation parliament adopt vet ensur diverg fiscal rule identifi correct earli stage moreov earlier year eu member state sign treati stabil coordin govern econom monetari union general known fiscal compact compact improv emu framework introduc cyclic adjust balancedbudget rule particip countri need transpos nation legisl final temporari crisi resolut mechan creat european financi stabil facil efsf remain activ juli despit replac perman organis autumn european stabil mechan esm combin maximum firepow billion two mechan help build effect firewal stem contagion crisi achiev far impress prior crisi would expect member state would reach consensus fundament chang way emu work chang enough emu need longerterm vision confront challeng order restor confid policymak euro area need resolut push ahead fiscal consolid structur reform enhanc competit european institutionbuild recent presid european council close cooper presid eurogroup european commiss european central bank put forward propos genuin emu four presid propos genuin emu built integr framework budgetari polici econom polici financi market polici turn must underpin greater democrat legitimaci account look option establish budgetari polici monetari union exclud uncoordin conduct fiscal polici member state three possibl model come mind first could fullyfledg fiscal union central budget feder debt issuanc card short run import step would need taken establish necessari euro areawid polit legitimaci govern second model would involv share sovereignti nation fiscal polici reciproc control public expenditur serv basi common debt issuanc govern reciproc control would also requir strong democrat legitimaci involv nation parliament third model would reli unqualifi adher fiscal disciplin member state without riskshar none three model alon possibl short run combin three desir mix decid upon peopl europ appropri democrat check emu uniqu construct tailor european specif need resembl exist feder let give exampl first foremost euro area countri regain abil save money raini day adher fiscal commit new framework fiscal compact alreadi agre limit mutual insur efsfesm centralis fiscal capac could consid provid basi perman transfer use promot market integr better resili econom shock instanc euro area unemploy insur scheme could set would support muchneed crosscountri labour mobil inde integr econom polici framework need boost econom integr ensur unsustain polici jeopardis stabil emu framework provid better enforc commit structur reform e measur increas countri competit capac adjust econom shock structur reform make emu robust addit integr financi market framework requir order break banksovereign nexus threaten financi integr anoth import element make marketbas risk share work effect mani euro area bank benefit singl currenc signific expand european busi activ still supervis nation level financi fragment describ led percept bank liabil even though nomin fact differ one euro area countri anoth accept currenc union thus complement bank union summit june eu member state enter polit commit european commiss propos creat singl supervisori mechan bank euro area entrust task ecb singl supervisori mechan implement way compromis ecb independ constrain monetari polici complement singl regim wind fail bank singl resolut fund euro area level final build deeper emu requir strengthen democrat legitimaci account peopl europ accept pool compet european level european policymak subject high standard account european parliament whose repres direct elect citizen alreadi play central role hold ecb eu institut account consequ deeper econom polit integr emu euro area becom view polit space right requir proper euro area account mechan polit legitimaci vital build popular support integr ladi gentlemen robert schuman draft declar start european integr process predict europ made accord singl plan built concret achiev first creat de facto solidar look europ progress sinc second world war stepbystep build emu inde see hold europ togeth engin reason success notion solidar solidar sometim narrow mean oneway support donor recipi cours alway key consider european construct eu structur fund go europ poorer region tangibl measur kind solidar likewis european crisi mechan efsf esm symbol euro area solidar solidar catchphras emu essenti let come back schuman insight concret achiev first creat de facto solidar reach point histori europ de facto solidar creat need concret achiev recent year made impress progress put emu architectur sounder foot euro area countri need continu path polici reform strengthen govern report four presid octob provid guidanc regard effort maintain confid crisi overcom thank attent would like thank stefan huemer contribut speech remain sole respons opinion express herein late european countri agre closer exchang rate cooper set standard fluctuat band plusminus bilater exchang rate exchang rate mechan erm function well decad ultim fell apart due diverg econom fiscal polici particip countri specul attack ensu ultim trigger crisi forc two larg countri unit kingdom itali leav erm reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en