"Benoît Cœuré: Risk-sharing in EMU: before, during and after the crisis",20-04-2012,European Central Bank,ECB,4147,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen, [1]I am honoured to be able to speak at the inaugural conference of the Julis-Rabinowitz Centre for Public Policy and Finance.In my remarks today, I wish to reinterpret the crisis in the euro area by speaking about mechanisms to share economic risks within Economic and Monetary Union (EMU).I will first describe risk-sharing in EMU before the global financial crisis of 2007-08. The architects of the euro expected Monetary Union to foster flexibility of national economies and convergence between them, and emphasised the need for economic policy to accompany and accelerate this process. Furthermore, they stressed that national public debt levels needed to be moderate on average, so that fiscal policy could be used to smooth out the effects of adverse economic shocks. They also believed that most of the pre-EMU shocks to national economies were the result of monetary and exchange rate policy decisions, and they expected them to be less pronounced once Monetary Union was in place.I will argue that the outcome was very different from that foreseen by the architects of the euro. In the first years of EMU, market-based risk-sharing mechanisms developed surprisingly quickly – perhaps too quickly – while policy did too little to induce flexibility or convergence and national fiscal institutions malfunctioned.I will then speak about the effects on risk-sharing of the global financial crisis of 2007-08 and the ensuing European sovereign debt crisis that began in 2010.The two crises impaired the market-based risk-sharing mechanisms in EMU. Since flexibility or convergence had not been achieved to the necessary extent, and national fiscal policy had limited ability to provide self-insurance, the two crises left the euro area with insufficient risk-sharing arrangements. The actions of the European Central Bank (ECB) and other public institutions, acting within their respective domains and according to their mandates, had the effect of temporarily filling this void.In the last part of my remarks, I will argue that, for EMU to be put on a sound and durable footing, market-based risk-sharing mechanisms must be restored and strengthened. Furthermore, the need for policy-makers to foster flexibility and convergence and for national fiscal policy to act responsibly must be taken seriously. The development of new pan-European institutions is also desirable, but as a complement to – not as a substitute for – policy action at the national level.The architects of the euro were well aware of the theory of optimum currency areas. Based on their knowledge of this theory and on empirical evidence, they expected firms and households in euro area countries to respond much less flexibly to economic shocks than, for instance, firms and households in individual states in the US union. Comparatively less developed financial markets, more rigid labour markets, low mobility of labour across participating economies, and the absence of a federal system of taxes and transfers similar to that in the United States were well-known features of the newly created Monetary Union.Since financial markets were relatively less developed and labour markets relatively more rigid, most professional economists expected market-based risk-sharing mechanisms to play a limited role in EMU, at least initially. To cope with this situation, the European governments bound themselves in the Treaty on European Union to foster the flexibility and convergence of their economies and to cooperate on economic policy. Furthermore, the nations adopting the common currency agreed to fiscal rules. The reasoning was that if an EMU member country had a moderate level of public debt in the steady state and an adverse economic shock occurred, the government of that country would be in a position to smooth taxes and spending over time. The national deficit would go up and down with the business cycle, but debt would fluctuate around this moderate steady-state level. History has taught us that successful monetary unions usually come together with a fiscal union. [2] This is illustrated by the history of the United States. Nevertheless, the view held in Europe at the time of the creation of the euro was that national fiscal rules could substitute for a fiscal union, provided they were strong enough. What did we actually see in the first years of EMU, before the outbreak of the global financial crisis? The policy commitments were not kept. Policy-makers made little effort to foster flexibility or convergence. The integration of markets for goods and services between euro area countries did continue, though essentially independently of any policy measures and as a result of previously taken commitments, such as the Single European Act, and to some extent as an endogenous consequence of Monetary Union. Trade flows within the euro area have increased and their nature has changed, with a lot more trade at the intensive margin and export price compression. [3] However, labour markets remained rigid in essentially all member countries. Labour within individual euro area countries has traditionally been significantly less mobile than labour in this country. Economic research shows that in the United States, in the year after a regional labour demand shock, labour mobility accounts for about one-half of the increase in regional employment resulting from that shock. In the European Union, before the crisis, it would take three times as much time – three years – for labour mobility to account for a similar proportion of the rise in regional employment after a shock. Instead, most of the reaction to shocks came through changes in participation rates. [4] Almost everywhere, the adoption of the euro was followed by at best incremental reform steps. Dual labour markets developed, with a significant fraction of employment growth due to temporary, and thus fragile, jobs. [5]Perhaps most importantly, many countries had entered EMU with high levels of public debt and did little or nothing to reduce it. For instance, France had a public debt-to-GDP ratio of 57% in the year 2000 and 64% in 2006. Germany had a public debt-to-GDP ratio of 60% in 2000 and 68% in 2006. The analogous numbers for Italy were 108% and 106%, and for Greece 103% and 106%. The Stability and Growth Pact was devised in 1998 to make sure that national budgets were kept close to balance or in surplus, thus regaining their ability to deliver insurance against macroeconomic shocks. It did not work.While progress was at best slow when it came to labour flexibility and national fiscal policy, market-based risk-sharing mechanisms developed surprisingly quickly. Integration of financial markets proceeded at a rapid pace, allowing firms and households in Europe to reap the benefits of lower and more uniform financing costs. The ECB developed its own set of indicators, both price and quantity indicators, in order to monitor the progress of financial integration in the euro area. [6] In some market segments, integration was immediate and complete; in others it was more gradual. Euro area money markets achieved the fastest and most complete integration. The cross-country standard deviation of unsecured lending rates decreased essentially to zero immediately after the introduction of the euro. While somewhat more fragmented, equity markets showed significant signs of integration as well, especially after the application of the Financial Services Action Plan. For example, the share of equity issued by euro area residents and held by residents of other euro area countries more than doubled between 1997 and 2006, to 29%. [7]Perhaps the most striking sign of market-based risk-sharing in the first years of EMU was the simple fact that the current account deficits and surpluses of euro area countries widened significantly. Furthermore, the large current account deficits were financed internally, within the euro area. In the years between the launch of EMU and the global financial crisis, Greece saw its current account deficit rise from about 7% to 15% of GDP; Spain from about 3% to 12%; Ireland from zero to about 7%; and Portugal from about 3% to 5% of GDP. These deficits were financed in the market, largely by investors from a single country: Germany. Germany, which entered EMU with a roughly balanced current account, saw its current account surplus climb to about 8% of GDP by 2007.One can say that in the first years of EMU, the Feldstein-Horioka puzzle within the Union quickly disappeared. This development had a straightforward explanation in economic theory: less wealthy euro area countries had better growth prospects and offered a higher return on investment. In this environment, greater financial integration allowed a decrease in saving and an increase in investment in less wealthy euro area countries. [8] The countries with large current account deficits boomed. All countries with large current account deficits except for Portugal experienced a signification improvement in real GDP. Between 2001 and 2007, real GDP increased by 35% in Ireland, 30% in Greece and 25% in Spain. By comparison, in the same period Germany grew by 10%. Increasingly, there were signs that high GDP growth rates were not accompanied by comparable developments in productivity. Current account deficits were exacerbated by excessive expectations of future revenues, encouraged by a benign global environment. As the boom continued, a gap in relative prices opened. Between 1998 and 2007, unit labour costs in Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain increased by 10% or more. In the same period, unit labour costs actually fell in Germany, and by more than 10%. The magnitude of that gap in relative prices as well as the size of the current account deficits could have – and perhaps should have – been interpreted as warnings. Accordingly, lending between euro area countries probably reflected insufficient risk management by financial institutions rather than genuine opportunities. This should have been apparent from the extent to which long-term cross-national investments were funded by short-term liabilities. To the extent that this was the case, hidden liabilities developed even in countries in which official fiscal statistics appeared reassuring. As such liabilities originated in the private sector, it was not properly understood that they would eventually migrate to government balance sheets when they assumed systemic importance.To sum up, here is a snapshot of risk-sharing mechanisms in EMU on the eve of the global economic crisis: financial markets which had developed surprisingly quickly – perhaps too quickly, in the light of the large transnational capital flows within EMU; insufficient surveillance by governments of current account imbalances and insufficient risk management by market participants; and, at the same time, little policy effort to achieve flexibility, convergence or fiscal responsibility owing to a benign global environment, and perhaps to the erroneous belief that Monetary Union would in itself engineer convergence. The mix of mobile capital, rigid labour and fiscal underperformance left the euro area vulnerable to a sudden malfunctioning of financial markets. Fickle capital could flow out of deficit countries at short notice, leaving them unprepared for adjustment. EMU seemed on the way to becoming an endogenous optimum currency area, and insufficient attention was paid to the possibility that markets could become segmented along national borders. Such fault lines should have been evident.When the global financial crisis of 2007-08 hit the European financial system, the market-based risk-sharing mechanisms in EMU were impaired. The newly developed euro area-wide interbank market, in particular the unsecured interbank market, first froze and, when it recovered, it became fragmented along national lines. A deterioration also occurred in the secured market segment, usually more resilient to market stress. Today, yields on money market instruments, and even more on sovereign bonds, have diverged across euro area countries. Cross-border bond holdings by banks have been partially unwound, and pan-European banking groups are tempted to allocate liquidity into national pools. In equity markets, the impact of the financial crisis on cross-border integration seems to have been more limited, but overall, much of the pre-2007 progress in terms of financial integration risks being erased. [9]Since flexibility and convergence had not been achieved to the necessary extent and national fiscal policy had limited ability to provide insurance, the euro area was left with insufficient risk-sharing arrangements. The actions of the ECB and other public institutions – some of them newly created – within their respective domains and according to their mandates, had the effect of temporarily filling this void.Official assistance packages – backed by the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and the International Monetary Fund – have provided elements of ex post cross-country risk-sharing to Greece, Ireland and Portugal, which had been cut off from international markets. Other policy steps have been taken towards restoring trust in financial markets and the soundness of banks. I am thinking of, for example, the capital exercise of the European Banking Authority (EBA) and injections of public capital into banks in some euro area countries.Meanwhile, the actions of the ECB and of the euro area national central banks – the Eurosystem – aimed to ensure the uniform transmission of the single monetary policy and a smooth functioning of euro area payment systems – in effect substituting for the malfunctioning euro area interbank market. Let me describe briefly the policy measures of the ECB in response to the crisis.The ECB cut the policy interest rates to unprecedentedly low levels and chose to match fully the increase in the banks’ demand for reserves, in order to support economic activity, prevent deflationary pressures and ensure a uniform transmission of the single monetary policy. We also lengthened the maturity at which we provide reserves to banks by launching two three-year longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs). Let me explain why. In the autumn of 2011, market-based funding was becoming scarcer for banks in the euro area. The LTROs have been critical, we think, in preventing funding issues from igniting a disorderly deleveraging process which could have led to a significant curtailment of banks’ lending to households and firms, and posed a downside risk for price stability.At times, we have undertaken direct intervention in selected financial markets. We have intervened only on a temporary and limited basis in clearly dysfunctional markets judged as being of critical importance for the transmission of the ECB’s monetary policy.The extent of the financial tension and the downward pressure on economic activity has varied across the euro area countries. Typically, banks that have experienced funding strains are operating in countries that ran large current account deficits in the pre-crisis era. The direct purpose of the ECB’s intervention has been to ensure that each bank – irrespective of its location in a particular euro area country – has sufficient reserves to deal with the possibility that creditors may refuse to roll over loans to that bank. Concretely, in some cases the reserves borrowed by distressed banks have been transferred to the creditors of those banks, often banks in the main current-account-surplus country in the euro area, Germany. The ECB has acted, on a temporary basis, as a substitute for decentralised markets within the euro area. [10]As a by-product of these developments, so-called TARGET2 imbalances have emerged. You will recall that TARGET2 is a recording, clearing and settlement system operated by the ECB. National central banks in the euro area – members of the Eurosystem – can build up claims vis-à-vis TARGET2 over time. TARGET2 is only a mirror of the underlying economic and financial imbalances: with a properly functioning interbank market, no claim would appear in TARGET2, and the underlying economic situation would be exactly the same. Constraining the flow of funds through TARGET2 would address a symptom of the crisis without tackling its causes. It would hamper the freedom of capital movements as well as the smooth operation of payment systems, which is a basic task of the Eurosystem as mandated by its Statute.The current situation is not a viable risk-sharing arrangement for the long run. Today, risk-sharing between euro area countries occurs to a considerable extent through public institutions and only to a limited extent through markets. This has constituted an optimal response to a temporary malfunctioning of markets. However, financial integration remains key to the efficiency and competitiveness of the European economy. The EU is a market-based economy and markets must play the primary role in allocating economic resources across EMU countries, sending price signals and monitoring the associated risks under adequate supervision. Let me discuss now what I see as the challenges ahead of us: how to restore and strengthen market-based risk-sharing mechanisms between euro area countries, and how to make euro area countries more resilient to adverse economic shocks in the future.I would like to break this discussion down into four areas.First, the rest of the euro area – or the rest of the European Union – should continue to support the adjustment process of euro area countries that had to address an unsustainable fiscal deficit or current account deficit – provided that there is adequate conditionality and monitoring. Currently, the rest of the euro area is accompanying – via the EFSF – the fiscal adjustment in Greece, Ireland and Portugal. Indeed, the rest of the world is supporting it through the IMF. The establishment of the European Stability Mechanism makes permanent the possibility of external support to a euro area member country in need. Ex ante monitoring and peer pressure are even more critical. The new excessive imbalance procedure prepared by the European Commission should be applied forcefully to identify an imbalance early on and seek a common solution with the euro area country in question.Second, the Treaty on Stability, Coordination and Governance in the Economic and Monetary Union – known as the Fiscal Compact – must be promptly ratified and applied consistently. Consistent application of its provisions – in particular, the balanced budget rule – will restore market confidence and the ability of national fiscal policy to smooth out the effects of adverse economic shocks. Note that the rules laid down in the Fiscal Compact concern the structural budget deficit, not the cyclical component of the budget. The intention is not to tie the hands of national fiscal policy-makers. Instead, the idea is to define clear and enforceable goals for fiscal policy in the long run, while leaving room for fiscal policy to react to negative shocks at business cycle frequency. This is surely a sound prescription for fiscal responsibility.Third, Europe needs to restore and strengthen its risk-sharing via financial markets and financial institutions. As was outlined in the Delors Report, EMU was created as the indispensable complement to the Single Market. [11] It is ironic that the outcome of this crisis is EMU with, de facto, little cross-country capital mobility. However, we cannot simply return to the kind of financial integration we had in the pre-crisis era. I have argued on other occasions that European policy-makers ought to adopt a “Financial Compact” as a complement to Monetary Union and to the Fiscal Compact, and pursue the creation – or re-creation – of a true pan-European market for capital. Repairing the single market for capital is a collective endeavour in which the ECB has a role to play, in coordination with the European Commission and the European Supervisory Authorities. To this end, let me put forward a few ideas. Meeting the capital adequacy targets set by the EBA’s capital exercise should be a priority. This process will strengthen banks, which will not only facilitate an appropriate provision of credit to the economy, but will also reduce counterparty risk and thereby help restart interbank transactions. In addition, the liquidity coverage ratio foreseen under the Basel III agreement must be implemented in such a way that it is not an obstacle to restarting interbank credit, in particular in its cross-national dimension. It is also vital to break the feedback loop between bank and sovereign credit which lies at the very heart of the current crisis. [12] I therefore believe that the Financial Compact should include a harmonised regime for bank resolution and, further ahead, a single European agency responsible for deposit insurance and for winding down failed banks.Fourth, European policy-makers need to take seriously the notion that it is up to them to foster the flexibility of labour market institutions, the mobility of labour between regions and euro area countries, and the integration of European markets for goods and services. Much progress remains to be made in order for Europeans to live in a truly Single Market. Policy initiatives to raise the economic growth potential in the aftermath of this crisis will be welcome. It is crucial that their promoters take the perspective of the Single Market, as opposed to the perspective of national economies. You have probably noticed that my discussion of how to recreate risk-sharing mechanisms in the euro area made little mention of the ECB. This is because the single monetary policy can at best support the required reform steps. Our best contribution will be to provide liquidity to banks so long as they are financially sound and have high-quality collateral, to ensure a smooth functioning of the payment system and, above all, to continue to deliver price stability. Let me conclude.When one thinks about the crisis in the euro area in terms of mechanisms to share economic risks within EMU, the following observations emerge.The years between the creation of the euro and the global financial crisis saw an unexpectedly rapid development of market-based risk-sharing mechanisms in EMU. However, current account imbalances were not monitored adequately by governments, and risks taken by financial market participants were insufficiently understood. Those years also saw, contrary to the provisions of the Treaty on European Union, little action by policy-makers to induce flexibility and convergence or to correct public finances. History will tell whether this was due to a benign global environment, to excessive faith in the endogenous effects of monetary union, or to badly designed institutions. The euro area became vulnerable to a breakdown of financial markets.Policy interventions temporarily provided risk-sharing arrangements for Europe, but ultimately, market-based risk-sharing mechanisms must be restored and strengthened. Furthermore, the need for policy-makers to induce flexibility and convergence and for national fiscal policy to act responsibly must be taken seriously. New pan-European institutions can be an important complement to – without being a substitute for – policy actions at the national level.I would like to end by quoting James Ingram’s conclusion of his visionary study of European monetary integration, published 39 years ago by this University:“It is obvious that the necessity for perfect confidence in the permanent fixity of exchange rate in monetary integration, as defined in this essay, ultimately confronts the reality of national sovereignty, which implies the right and power of a nation to change its mind. Europe has so far resolved the potential conflict between sovereignty and federalism through negotiation and compromise. Such resolution may become increasingly difficult as integration becomes closer. Without some signs of political unification, it may be particularly difficult to convince the capital markets that exchange rates are irrevocably fixed.” [13]Negotiation and compromise have indeed become more difficult as integration has become closer. But the EU is a union of democracies and it should be more trustful of the power of democracy to produce the solutions that will address the deep causes of the crisis. Signs of political unification are needed more than ever to combat European fragmentation, withstand the temptation to raise national barriers, and take collective action to deliver stability and growth.Thank you for your attention.[1]I wish to thank Bartosz Mackowiak and Alexander Popov for their contributions to this speech, and Ignazio Angeloni for his comments. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.[2]See Bordo, M., “The Euro needs a Fiscal Union: Some Lessons from History”, Shadow Open Market Committee, October 2010.[3]See Fontagné, L., Mayer, T. and Ottaviano G., “Of Markets, Products and Prices: The Effects of the Euro on European Firms”, Intereconomics: Review of European Economic Policy, 44 (3), 2009, pp. 149-158.[4]Strikingly, this finding held within individual European countries. This empirical regularity could not therefore be explained by factors such as language or unwillingness to move to another country. See Decressin, J. and Fatas, A., “Regional labour market dynamics in Europe”, European Economic Review, 39(9), 1995, pp. 1627-1655. The contribution of labour mobility to adjustment may have improved in the 1990s and now be closer to that observed in the United States. See L’Angevin, C., “Labor Market Adjustment Dynamics and Labor Mobility Within the Euro Area”, DGTPE Working Paper, 2007-6.[5]See Arpaia, A. and Mourre, G., “Institutions and performance in European labour markets: Taking a fresh look at evidence”, European Economy – Economic Papers, No 391, Directorate General Economic and Monetary Affairs, European Commission, 2009. [6]The full set of these indicators can be found in the ECB’s annual report entitled “Financial integration in Europe”.[7]See “Financial integration in Europe”, ECB, April 2008.[8]See Blanchard, O. and Giavazzi, F., “Current account deficits in the euro area: The end of the Feldstein-Horioka puzzle?”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 33(2), 2002, pp. 147-210.[9]On the impact of the crisis, see “Financial integration in Europe”, ECB, April 2012.[10]See also Merler, S. and Pisani-Ferry, J., “Sudden Stops in the Euro Area”, Bruegel Policy Contribution, 2012/06.[11]“Report on economic and monetary union in the European Community” (the Delors Report), Committee for the Study of Economic and Monetary Union, Jacques Delors, Chairman, April 1989.[12]This mechanism was foreseen by Eichengreen and Wyplosz. See Eichengreen, B. and Wyplosz, C., “The Stability Pact: More than a Minor Nuisance”, Economic Policy, 13, 1998, pp. 65-104.[13]Ingram, J.C., “The Case for European Monetary Integration”, Essays in International Finance, 98, Princeton University, 1973.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen honour abl speak inaugur confer julisrabinowitz centr public polici financ remark today wish reinterpret crisi euro area speak mechan share econom risk within econom monetari union emu first describ riskshar emu global financi crisi architect euro expect monetari union foster flexibl nation economi converg emphasis need econom polici accompani acceler process furthermor stress nation public debt level need moder averag fiscal polici could use smooth effect advers econom shock also believ preemu shock nation economi result monetari exchang rate polici decis expect less pronounc monetari union place argu outcom differ foreseen architect euro first year emu marketbas riskshar mechan develop surpris quick perhap quick polici littl induc flexibl converg nation fiscal institut malfunct speak effect riskshar global financi crisi ensu european sovereign debt crisi began two crise impair marketbas riskshar mechan emu sinc flexibl converg achiev necessari extent nation fiscal polici limit abil provid selfinsur two crise left euro area insuffici riskshar arrang action european central bank ecb public institut act within respect domain accord mandat effect temporarili fill void last part remark argu emu put sound durabl foot marketbas riskshar mechan must restor strengthen furthermor need policymak foster flexibl converg nation fiscal polici act respons must taken serious develop new paneuropean institut also desir complement substitut polici action nation level architect euro well awar theori optimum currenc area base knowledg theori empir evid expect firm household euro area countri respond much less flexibl econom shock instanc firm household individu state us union compar less develop financi market rigid labour market low mobil labour across particip economi absenc feder system tax transfer similar unit state wellknown featur newli creat monetari union sinc financi market relat less develop labour market relat rigid profession economist expect marketbas riskshar mechan play limit role emu least initi cope situat european govern bound treati european union foster flexibl converg economi cooper econom polici furthermor nation adopt common currenc agre fiscal rule reason emu member countri moder level public debt steadi state advers econom shock occur govern countri would posit smooth tax spend time nation deficit would go busi cycl debt would fluctuat around moder steadyst level histori taught us success monetari union usual come togeth fiscal union illustr histori unit state nevertheless view held europ time creation euro nation fiscal rule could substitut fiscal union provid strong enough actual see first year emu outbreak global financi crisi polici commit kept policymak made littl effort foster flexibl converg integr market good servic euro area countri continu though essenti independ polici measur result previous taken commit singl european act extent endogen consequ monetari union trade flow within euro area increas natur chang lot trade intens margin export price compress howev labour market remain rigid essenti member countri labour within individu euro area countri tradit signific less mobil labour countri econom research show unit state year region labour demand shock labour mobil account onehalf increas region employ result shock european union crisi would take three time much time three year labour mobil account similar proport rise region employ shock instead reaction shock came chang particip rate almost everywher adopt euro follow best increment reform step dual labour market develop signific fraction employ growth due temporari thus fragil job perhap import mani countri enter emu high level public debt littl noth reduc instanc franc public debttogdp ratio year germani public debttogdp ratio analog number itali greec stabil growth pact devis make sure nation budget kept close balanc surplus thus regain abil deliv insur macroeconom shock work progress best slow came labour flexibl nation fiscal polici marketbas riskshar mechan develop surpris quick integr financi market proceed rapid pace allow firm household europ reap benefit lower uniform financ cost ecb develop set indic price quantiti indic order monitor progress financi integr euro area market segment integr immedi complet other gradual euro area money market achiev fastest complet integr crosscountri standard deviat unsecur lend rate decreas essenti zero immedi introduct euro somewhat fragment equiti market show signific sign integr well especi applic financi servic action plan exampl share equiti issu euro area resid held resid euro area countri doubl perhap strike sign marketbas riskshar first year emu simpl fact current account deficit surplus euro area countri widen signific furthermor larg current account deficit financ intern within euro area year launch emu global financi crisi greec saw current account deficit rise gdp spain ireland zero portug gdp deficit financ market larg investor singl countri germani germani enter emu rough balanc current account saw current account surplus climb gdp one say first year emu feldsteinhorioka puzzl within union quick disappear develop straightforward explan econom theori less wealthi euro area countri better growth prospect offer higher return invest environ greater financi integr allow decreas save increas invest less wealthi euro area countri countri larg current account deficit boom countri larg current account deficit except portug experienc signif improv real gdp real gdp increas ireland greec spain comparison period germani grew increas sign high gdp growth rate accompani compar develop product current account deficit exacerb excess expect futur revenu encourag benign global environ boom continu gap relat price open unit labour cost greec ireland portug spain increas period unit labour cost actual fell germani magnitud gap relat price well size current account deficit could perhap interpret warn accord lend euro area countri probabl reflect insuffici risk manag financi institut rather genuin opportun appar extent longterm crossnat invest fund shortterm liabil extent case hidden liabil develop even countri offici fiscal statist appear reassur liabil origin privat sector proper understood would eventu migrat govern balanc sheet assum system import sum snapshot riskshar mechan emu eve global econom crisi financi market develop surpris quick perhap quick light larg transnat capit flow within emu insuffici surveil govern current account imbal insuffici risk manag market particip time littl polici effort achiev flexibl converg fiscal respons owe benign global environ perhap erron belief monetari union would engin converg mix mobil capit rigid labour fiscal underperform left euro area vulner sudden malfunct financi market fickl capit could flow deficit countri short notic leav unprepar adjust emu seem way becom endogen optimum currenc area insuffici attent paid possibl market could becom segment along nation border fault line evid global financi crisi hit european financi system marketbas riskshar mechan emu impair newli develop euro areawid interbank market particular unsecur interbank market first froze recov becam fragment along nation line deterior also occur secur market segment usual resili market stress today yield money market instrument even sovereign bond diverg across euro area countri crossbord bond hold bank partial unwound paneuropean bank group tempt alloc liquid nation pool equiti market impact financi crisi crossbord integr seem limit overal much pre progress term financi integr risk eras sinc flexibl converg achiev necessari extent nation fiscal polici limit abil provid insur euro area left insuffici riskshar arrang action ecb public institut newli creat within respect domain accord mandat effect temporarili fill void offici assist packag back european financi stabil facil efsf intern monetari fund provid element ex post crosscountri riskshar greec ireland portug cut intern market polici step taken toward restor trust financi market sound bank think exampl capit exercis european bank author eba inject public capit bank euro area countri meanwhil action ecb euro area nation central bank eurosystem aim ensur uniform transmiss singl monetari polici smooth function euro area payment system effect substitut malfunct euro area interbank market let describ briefli polici measur ecb respons crisi ecb cut polici interest rate unpreced low level chose match fulli increas bank demand reserv order support econom activ prevent deflationari pressur ensur uniform transmiss singl monetari polici also lengthen matur provid reserv bank launch two threeyear longerterm refinanc oper ltros let explain autumn marketbas fund becom scarcer bank euro area ltros critic think prevent fund issu ignit disord deleverag process could led signific curtail bank lend household firm pose downsid risk price stabil time undertaken direct intervent select financi market interven temporari limit basi clear dysfunct market judg critic import transmiss ecb monetari polici extent financi tension downward pressur econom activ vari across euro area countri typic bank experienc fund strain oper countri ran larg current account deficit precrisi era direct purpos ecb intervent ensur bank irrespect locat particular euro area countri suffici reserv deal possibl creditor may refus roll loan bank concret case reserv borrow distress bank transfer creditor bank often bank main currentaccountsurplus countri euro area germani ecb act temporari basi substitut decentralis market within euro area byproduct develop socal target imbal emerg recal target record clear settlement system oper ecb nation central bank euro area member eurosystem build claim visàvi target time target mirror under econom financi imbal proper function interbank market claim would appear target under econom situat would exact constrain flow fund target would address symptom crisi without tackl caus would hamper freedom capit movement well smooth oper payment system basic task eurosystem mandat statut current situat viabl riskshar arrang long run today riskshar euro area countri occur consider extent public institut limit extent market constitut optim respons temporari malfunct market howev financi integr remain key effici competit european economi eu marketbas economi market must play primari role alloc econom resourc across emu countri send price signal monitor associ risk adequ supervis let discuss see challeng ahead us restor strengthen marketbas riskshar mechan euro area countri make euro area countri resili advers econom shock futur would like break discuss four area first rest euro area rest european union continu support adjust process euro area countri address unsustain fiscal deficit current account deficit provid adequ condit monitor current rest euro area accompani via efsf fiscal adjust greec ireland portug inde rest world support imf establish european stabil mechan make perman possibl extern support euro area member countri need ex ant monitor peer pressur even critic new excess imbal procedur prepar european commiss appli forc identifi imbal earli seek common solut euro area countri question second treati stabil coordin govern econom monetari union known fiscal compact must prompt ratifi appli consist consist applic provis particular balanc budget rule restor market confid abil nation fiscal polici smooth effect advers econom shock note rule laid fiscal compact concern structur budget deficit cyclic compon budget intent tie hand nation fiscal policymak instead idea defin clear enforc goal fiscal polici long run leav room fiscal polici react negat shock busi cycl frequenc sure sound prescript fiscal respons third europ need restor strengthen riskshar via financi market financi institut outlin delor report emu creat indispens complement singl market iron outcom crisi emu de facto littl crosscountri capit mobil howev cannot simpli return kind financi integr precrisi era argu occas european policymak ought adopt financi compact complement monetari union fiscal compact pursu creation recreat true paneuropean market capit repair singl market capit collect endeavour ecb role play coordin european commiss european supervisori author end let put forward idea meet capit adequaci target set eba capit exercis prioriti process strengthen bank facilit appropri provis credit economi also reduc counterparti risk therebi help restart interbank transact addit liquid coverag ratio foreseen basel iii agreement must implement way obstacl restart interbank credit particular crossnat dimens also vital break feedback loop bank sovereign credit lie heart current crisi therefor believ financi compact includ harmonis regim bank resolut ahead singl european agenc respons deposit insur wind fail bank fourth european policymak need take serious notion foster flexibl labour market institut mobil labour region euro area countri integr european market good servic much progress remain made order european live truli singl market polici initi rais econom growth potenti aftermath crisi welcom crucial promot take perspect singl market oppos perspect nation economi probabl notic discuss recreat riskshar mechan euro area made littl mention ecb singl monetari polici best support requir reform step best contribut provid liquid bank long financi sound highqual collater ensur smooth function payment system continu deliv price stabil let conclud one think crisi euro area term mechan share econom risk within emu follow observ emerg year creation euro global financi crisi saw unexpect rapid develop marketbas riskshar mechan emu howev current account imbal monitor adequ govern risk taken financi market particip insuffici understood year also saw contrari provis treati european union littl action policymak induc flexibl converg correct public financ histori tell whether due benign global environ excess faith endogen effect monetari union bad design institut euro area becam vulner breakdown financi market polici intervent temporarili provid riskshar arrang europ ultim marketbas riskshar mechan must restor strengthen furthermor need policymak induc flexibl converg nation fiscal polici act respons must taken serious new paneuropean institut import complement without substitut polici action nation level would like end quot jame ingram conclus visionari studi european monetari integr publish year ago univers obvious necess perfect confid perman fixiti exchang rate monetari integr defin essay ultim confront realiti nation sovereignti impli right power nation chang mind europ far resolv potenti conflict sovereignti feder negoti compromis resolut may becom increas difficult integr becom closer without sign polit unif may particular difficult convinc capit market exchang rate irrevoc fix negoti compromis inde becom difficult integr becom closer eu union democraci trust power democraci produc solut address deep caus crisi sign polit unif need ever combat european fragment withstand temptat rais nation barrier take collect action deliv stabil growth thank attent wish thank bartosz mackowiak alexand popov contribut speech ignazio angeloni comment remain sole respons opinion contain herein see bordo m euro need fiscal union lesson histori shadow open market committe octob see fontagné l mayer ottaviano g market product price effect euro european firm intereconom review european econom polici pp strike find held within individu european countri empir regular could therefor explain factor languag unwilling move anoth countri see decressin j fata region labour market dynam europ european econom review pp contribut labour mobil adjust may improv closer observ unit state see l angevin c labor market adjust dynam labor mobil within euro area dgtpe work paper see arpaia mourr g institut perform european labour market take fresh look evid european economi econom paper director general econom monetari affair european commiss full set indic found ecb annual report entitl financi integr europ see financi integr europ ecb april see blanchard o giavazzi f current account deficit euro area end feldsteinhorioka puzzl brook paper econom activ pp impact crisi see financi integr europ ecb april see also merler pisaniferri j sudden stop euro area bruegel polici contribut report econom monetari union european communiti delor report committe studi econom monetari union jacqu delor chairman april mechan foreseen eichengreen wyplosz see eichengreen b wyplosz c stabil pact minor nuisanc econom polici pp ingram j c case european monetari integr essay intern financ princeton univers reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en