Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: SEPA – three months to go and full steam ahead?,08-10-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,2264,"<p>Thank you very much for inviting me to present the ECB’s view on the Single Euro Payments Area (or SEPA). I really appreciate these opportunities to exchange views with market participants, and I am looking forward to your questions later on. In less than three months, SEPA will start. SEPA will make it possible for retail payments in euro to be made throughout the euro area as easily, safely and efficiently as domestic payments today. But SEPA means more than new pan-European credit transfers and direct debits. Multinational companies are centralising their payments departments in a single payments unit which handles all European transactions. Some multinational banks are doing the same thing: creating payment factories for Europe. The payments processors are quickly adapting to the new European environment: takeovers, mergers and cooperation agreements are the order of day. For retail payments in Europe, the borders will disappear. Last month, I delivered my yearly speech to the European Payments Council. I would like to thank Gerard Hartsink again for the constructive working relationship between the EPC and the Eurosystem with regard to SEPA. In that speech, I compared the SEPA project to a train. And my implicit question to the EPC was: is SEPA a steam train – technologically-backward, slow and difficult to operate? Or will SEPA be a TGV – modern, fast and easy to run? As you may know, a high-speed railway line has recently been built in eastern France and the train service between Frankfurt and Paris has been upgraded. The travel time is now only four hours, two hours shorter then before. The service is offered jointly by Deutsche Bahn with its ICE trains and SNCF, the French operator, with its TGV trains. Many technical changes to the trains were necessary, as well as intensive testing, to enable the trains to be driven safely in both countries. It is a model of cross-border cooperation, the technology is adapted for cross-border use and a cross-border service is offered to passengers. The borders have truly disappeared…haven’t they? On the way back from Paris to Frankfurt, just after the scheduled stop at Forbach, the last station in France, and shortly before Saarbrücken, the first station in Germany, the train came to a sudden, brutal and complete stop. It would not move. The train driver announced that there was a technical problem, and that he would try to fix it. But the train just would not move. It was ‘reset’ completely. All the power was turned off, including the internal lights. It still would not move. And for two hours it stood there, stranded on the border between France and Germany. Finally, a locomotive arrived to tow this technological showcase into Saarbrücken Hauptbahnhof. Apparently, the border between France and Germany had not disappeared… So, what does this tell us about SEPA? Are there any parallels? Is there a risk that, after many years of preparing, designing, developing, implementing and testing, SEPA payments will come to a stop at the border? We shall see in a few weeks’ time.In my speech tonight, I would like to: convey the views of the Eurosystem on the current phase of the SEPA project; outline the next steps for SEPA – those which should be taken to make it more attractive to customers;and I will consider some issues specific to the German retail payments market. With less than three months to go before it starts, SEPA has reached a critical phase. Let me briefly run through the Eurosystem’s key recommendations for the SEPA project contained in the recently published Fifth Progress Report. To prepare for a take-up of the SEPA Direct Debit, all its features need to be clarified by December 2007. As a minimum, an e-mandate solution has to be developed, making it possible to create and process the mandate via the internet. A business-to-business direct debit scheme also should be developed that is capable of gaining wide acceptance from corporate users. The Eurosystem sees a genuine need for at least one additional pan-European debit card scheme. It would stimulate competition, and banks should realise that without an additional scheme they would only have two to choose from. Moreover, a European scheme is more likely to ensure the strategic involvement of European banks in the cards business.Finally, more communication on SEPA is needed. Even corporate customers are largely unaware of SEPA, even though they would have very good reasons for migrating to SEPA. Moreover, in order to reach a critical mass of payments, their role is crucial. Banks need to explain to all their customers what SEPA is and what it will mean for them in their daily lives. IBAN and BIC should not remain mysterious acronyms, but should be presented as keys which will open the door to the European payments market. Banks should present their detailed product offerings for SEPA now: the rules, the service levels, the prices. Banks should assist their customers in changing over to these new products. In this sense, communication on SEPA should be as intensive as it was for the changeover to the euro. I would be very interested to hear from you today what preparations are under way in your banks. Apart from these short-term recommendations, the Eurosystem urges the EPC to continue its work and take responsibility for the further development of SEPA. The SEPA project has until now aimed to lay the groundwork for the core SEPA payment products and to set the basic requirements for infrastructures and card schemes. Banks are implementing the changes. Some have successfully completed the SEPA testing programme offered by SWIFT. Real products are being developed, based on the rulebooks and their implementation guidelines. As their top priority, banks need to develop services that will help their customers to migrate to these new SEPA products. Corporate customers will not start to use the SEPA Credit Transfer if they cannot update their bank account databases automatically. If customers had to provide their IBAN and BIC, it would cost each business tens of euro per customer to manually change in their company databases the domestic bank account number plus the ‘Bankleitzahl’ into the IBAN plus BIC. Just imagine how much work would be needed for Volkswagen, Siemens or Deutsche Telekom to manually change their employees’ banking details. Or for the ‘Bundesagentur für Arbeit’ to manually change the banking details of all those who receive unemployment benefits. Such companies and institutions need to be able to send to their bank or to a data provider their complete file of banking details and receive back a file containing the IBANs and BICs. Such an IBAN/BIC update service is therefore urgently needed. In addition, ways should be found to help creditors to use the existing mandates for the new SEPA Direct Debits. Energy suppliers, insurance companies, newspaper companies, telecom operators, landlords and others would far prefer to keep using the current direct debit products if they were unable to switch to the SEPA Direct Debit for existing customers. The EPC and the national banking communities should tackle this issue, in coordination with the national central banks and legislators. This should be feasible, especially if customer rights are not negatively affected by the changeover. The second way of making SEPA more attractive is for banks to develop future-oriented products and services. The basic and core payment products now defined in SEPA only meet the basic and core customer demands, but do not meet the needs of the modern, informed and demanding customer. One of these demands is to reduce the costs of making and collecting payments. Using e-invoices and limiting the number of paper invoices being sent by post would save companies a lot of money. When e-invoicing is coupled with a direct debit or with Electronic Bill Presentment and Payment (EBPP), it not only cuts the amount of paperwork on the debtor’s side but also reduces mistakes in filling out the payment order. For companies, huge efficiency gains can also be made when their payments are linked automatically and seamlessly to their businesses processes, i.e. linked to the value chain within their company. This has been a long-standing demand of many corporate customers, one to which banks should respond. As such, SEPA should address standardisation in the customer-to-bank field. The recently published World Payments Report 2007 mentions this as a condition for a successful take-up of SEPA by corporates. Other conditions include a comparable quality and price level for SEPA products, and clarity on a common end-date. Let me now focus on the German retail payments market. I have already mentioned the need for migration services aimed at automatically updating domestic account numbers plus the ‘Bankleitzahl’ into IBAN and BIC, as well as the need to enable the use of existing direct debit mandates for the new SEPA Direct Debit. The EPC is the market-driven decision-making body for the European payments industry. Some market participants, also here in Germany, have their doubts on the future for the EPC. The Eurosystem however sees a clear role for the EPC as contributor to the further development of SEPA. In several countries, retail payments are processed end to end within two working days, or even on the same day. Banks in these countries will most probably offer Additional Optional Services to bring their SEPA payment products up to the same service level as the current domestic products. But SEPA does not stop at the border. If foreign banks offer better services, some customers will prefer to use these foreign banks. Banks all over Europe might have to improve their service levels, such as the processing time, if other European banks offer better services. Merely waiting for the Payment Services Directive to become effective, which is to offer T+1 by 2012, might no longer be sufficient in a competitive, integrated, European payments market. The Payment Services Directive was disputed because of potentially creating an unlevel playing field for banks. However, a good compromise was reached in the end. Payment institutions will focus on a limited set of payment activities and will be subject to adequate supervision and oversight. As for the World Payments Report, some newspapers said it offered a relatively pessimistic assessment of the progress of the SEPA project. As you know with journalists, good news is no news. If you read the full report, you will see that it contains a different message. It places SEPA in the broader economic and regulatory context and gives a clear message to banks: “Over the next two to three years successful banks will rely on their major strengths to develop effective strategies to meet the intense challenges of increasing competition in the SEPA marketplace from ACHs, payment service providers, new non-European entrants, and later, payment institutions”. When talking about future-oriented payment services, changing business models and pressures on revenues due to increased competition, we should also bear cash payments in mind. Research has shown that cash services are a loss-making business for banks; it is a product with very high costs and low revenues. The Eurosystem is taking steps to harmonise the cash services of the NCBs. Moreover, the Eurosystem encourages the banks’ measures to promote the use of the most social-cost-efficient means of payment in every payment situation. Germany’s payment system, which in general is considered efficient, still has room for improvement, especially due to the high use of cash compared with other west European countries. SEPA for Cards represents a huge opportunity here, and banks should really try to make cards more attractive to cardholders and to merchants. With VISA entering the German card market with its new V PAY card product, alongside EC Karte and Maestro, banks will have more choice. We will monitor these developments closely, and we expect that the increased competition will lead to better services and lower prices for cardholders and merchants. In my speech tonight, I have conveyed the views of the Eurosystem on the current phase of the SEPA project.In the short term, efforts need to be stepped up to overcome problems that could hamper the timely launch of SEPA in January 2008. Specific attention should be paid to the finalisation of SEPA Direct Debit. An additional pan-European debit card scheme is genuinely needed. Moreover, communication efforts need to be intensified. Basic information should be provided to all customers. And customers are anxious to receive the new SEPA product offerings. Without clear communication, SEPA will not get off to a good start. Without active promotion, the migration will be a non-starter. In parallel, preparations should get under way to make SEPA more attractive to customers. Merely offering the core and basic SEPA products will not trigger the migration. Banks need to make progress and develop future-oriented products that meet customer demands and needs. In the German retail payments market, specific attention should be given to IBAN/BIC conversion, the use of existing mandates for the new SEPA Direct Debit and the general service level, such as the processing time. Moreover, German banks need to rethink their business strategies to survive and thrive in the new payments market. SEPA for Cards has an enormous potential in Germany.The departure of the SEPA train is imminent. With increased communication efforts, I am sure that, for retail payments in Europe, the borders will disappear. Perhaps at the outset it will not be used as often as we would like. But ultimately SEPA payments will travel swiftly, smoothly and safely across what once used to be the border. Thank you very much for your attention.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",thank much invit present ecb view singl euro payment area sepa realli appreci opportun exchang view market particip look forward question later less three month sepa start sepa make possibl retail payment euro made throughout euro area easili safe effici domest payment today sepa mean new paneuropean credit transfer direct debit multin compani centralis payment depart singl payment unit handl european transact multin bank thing creat payment factori europ payment processor quick adapt new european environ takeov merger cooper agreement order day retail payment europ border disappear last month deliv year speech european payment council would like thank gerard hartsink construct work relationship epc eurosystem regard sepa speech compar sepa project train implicit question epc sepa steam train technologicallybackward slow difficult oper sepa tgv modern fast easi run may know highspe railway line recent built eastern franc train servic frankfurt pari upgrad travel time four hour two hour shorter servic offer joint deutsch bahn ice train sncf french oper tgv train mani technic chang train necessari well intens test enabl train driven safe countri model crossbord cooper technolog adapt crossbord use crossbord servic offer passeng border truli disappear haven way back pari frankfurt schedul stop forbach last station franc short saarbrücken first station germani train came sudden brutal complet stop would move train driver announc technic problem would tri fix train would move reset complet power turn includ intern light still would move two hour stood strand border franc germani final locomot arriv tow technolog showcas saarbrücken hauptbahnhof appar border franc germani disappear tell us sepa parallel risk mani year prepar design develop implement test sepa payment come stop border shall see week time speech tonight would like convey view eurosystem current phase sepa project outlin next step sepa taken make attract custom consid issu specif german retail payment market less three month go start sepa reach critic phase let briefli run eurosystem key recommend sepa project contain recent publish fifth progress report prepar takeup sepa direct debit featur need clarifi decemb minimum emand solut develop make possibl creat process mandat via internet businesstobusi direct debit scheme also develop capabl gain wide accept corpor user eurosystem see genuin need least one addit paneuropean debit card scheme would stimul competit bank realis without addit scheme would two choos moreov european scheme like ensur strateg involv european bank card busi final communic sepa need even corpor custom larg unawar sepa even though would good reason migrat sepa moreov order reach critic mass payment role crucial bank need explain custom sepa mean daili live iban bic remain mysteri acronym present key open door european payment market bank present detail product offer sepa rule servic level price bank assist custom chang new product sens communic sepa intens changeov euro would interest hear today prepar way bank apart shortterm recommend eurosystem urg epc continu work take respons develop sepa sepa project aim lay groundwork core sepa payment product set basic requir infrastructur card scheme bank implement chang success complet sepa test programm offer swift real product develop base rulebook implement guidelin top prioriti bank need develop servic help custom migrat new sepa product corpor custom start use sepa credit transfer cannot updat bank account databas automat custom provid iban bic would cost busi ten euro per custom manual chang compani databas domest bank account number plus bankleitzahl iban plus bic imagin much work would need volkswagen siemen deutsch telekom manual chang employe bank detail bundesagentur für arbeit manual chang bank detail receiv unemploy benefit compani institut need abl send bank data provid complet file bank detail receiv back file contain iban bic ibanb updat servic therefor urgent need addit way found help creditor use exist mandat new sepa direct debit energi supplier insur compani newspap compani telecom oper landlord other would far prefer keep use current direct debit product unabl switch sepa direct debit exist custom epc nation bank communiti tackl issu coordin nation central bank legisl feasibl especi custom right negat affect changeov second way make sepa attract bank develop futureori product servic basic core payment product defin sepa meet basic core custom demand meet need modern inform demand custom one demand reduc cost make collect payment use einvoic limit number paper invoic sent post would save compani lot money einvoic coupl direct debit electron bill present payment ebpp cut amount paperwork debtor side also reduc mistak fill payment order compani huge effici gain also made payment link automat seamless busi process e link valu chain within compani longstand demand mani corpor custom one bank respond sepa address standardis customertobank field recent publish world payment report mention condit success takeup sepa corpor condit includ compar qualiti price level sepa product clariti common enddat let focus german retail payment market alreadi mention need migrat servic aim automat updat domest account number plus bankleitzahl iban bic well need enabl use exist direct debit mandat new sepa direct debit epc marketdriven decisionmak bodi european payment industri market particip also germani doubt futur epc eurosystem howev see clear role epc contributor develop sepa sever countri retail payment process end end within two work day even day bank countri probabl offer addit option servic bring sepa payment product servic level current domest product sepa stop border foreign bank offer better servic custom prefer use foreign bank bank europ might improv servic level process time european bank offer better servic mere wait payment servic direct becom effect offer might longer suffici competit integr european payment market payment servic direct disput potenti creat unlevel play field bank howev good compromis reach end payment institut focus limit set payment activ subject adequ supervis oversight world payment report newspap said offer relat pessimist assess progress sepa project know journalist good news news read full report see contain differ messag place sepa broader econom regulatori context give clear messag bank next two three year success bank reli major strength develop effect strategi meet intens challeng increas competit sepa marketplac ach payment servic provid new noneuropean entrant later payment institut talk futureori payment servic chang busi model pressur revenu due increas competit also bear cash payment mind research shown cash servic lossmak busi bank product high cost low revenu eurosystem take step harmonis cash servic ncbs moreov eurosystem encourag bank measur promot use socialcosteffici mean payment everi payment situat germani payment system general consid effici still room improv especi due high use cash compar west european countri sepa card repres huge opportun bank realli tri make card attract cardhold merchant visa enter german card market new v pay card product alongsid ec kart maestro bank choic monitor develop close expect increas competit lead better servic lower price cardhold merchant speech tonight convey view eurosystem current phase sepa project short term effort need step overcom problem could hamper time launch sepa januari specif attent paid finalis sepa direct debit addit paneuropean debit card scheme genuin need moreov communic effort need intensifi basic inform provid custom custom anxious receiv new sepa product offer without clear communic sepa get good start without activ promot migrat nonstart parallel prepar get way make sepa attract custom mere offer core basic sepa product trigger migrat bank need make progress develop futureori product meet custom demand need german retail payment market specif attent given ibanb convers use exist mandat new sepa direct debit general servic level process time moreov german bank need rethink busi strategi surviv thrive new payment market sepa card enorm potenti germani departur sepa train immin increas communic effort sure retail payment europ border disappear perhap outset use often would like ultim sepa payment travel swift smooth safe across use border thank much attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en