Jörg Asmussen: Introductory remarks to panel ‘Lessons from Latvia and the Baltics’,05-06-2012,European Central Bank,ECB,1715,"<p>Dear ladies and gentlemen,It is my pleasure to be here today in Riga to discuss the lessons from the Baltic recovery. In the Hanseatic League, to which Riga and other Baltic cities belonged, commerce and politics went hand in hand. And history is never far away from the headlines of the day. The ongoing financial and sovereign debt crisis illustrates yet again how closely economics and politics interact – for good or for bad.I would like to structure my intervention around the following three main questions:What makes the Latvian experience so special in the context of the current crisis?What can euro area countries learn from the Baltic recovery?What can Latvia itself learn from its adjustment?It is said that “good economics is often bad politics” and vice versa. The experience of Latvia and more generally the Baltics is worth exploring precisely because it defied this conventional wisdom – both economically and politically.First, it disproved the frequently made claim that an internal devaluation strategy cannot work. From 2008, Latvia was faced with the deepest recession in the world. The cumulative output decline was 24%; unemployment peaked at 20%. Compared with this economic collapse, even some of the euro area peripheral countries were faring relatively better. Keeping the euro peg was considered by many as a “mission impossible”. External devaluation was presented as the only way forward. But Latvia did not choose the easy “quick fix”. It embarked on a courageous fiscal consolidation path and structural reforms. Two years later, the speed of the economic rebound is as extraordinary as the depth of the recession. Against all the odds, Latvia recorded a real GDP growth rate of 5.5% in 2011. While domestic demand was the main driver of growth last year, exports have also recovered very strongly. Evidently, Latvia’s competitiveness has improved, even though many challenges still lie ahead. The economic dynamics behind this swift stabilisation and recovery merit close examination.Equally interesting is the political economy of the Baltic adjustment. Jean-Claude Juncker once said: “we all know what to do but we don’t know how to get re-elected afterwards”. This saying, often referred to as “Juncker’s curse”, unfortunately seems to be confirmed by the crisis in vast segments of the euro area. Italy, Greece, Ireland, Portugal: in all of these countries the government fell directly as a result of its handling of the economic crisis. Latvia seems to be the exception to the rule. Despite harsh austerity measures the Prime Minister managed to get re-elected twice. Many ruling politicians in Europe these days may look upon this with incredulous admiration. Why was the internal devaluation strategy effective in Latvia and the Baltics, while other countries are still struggling with a deep economic and political crisis? It is worth drawing lessons from the Baltic experience for euro area member countries. Let me start with fiscal consolidation. The Baltic experience shows clearly that speed is of the essence. In all three Baltic countries, the government reacted swiftly to the deterioration of public finances and frontloaded fiscal adjustment. With a budget consolidation of around 9% of GDP in 2009 alone, Latvia’s effort is unparalleled in Europe. Undertaking the necessary austerity measures at an early stage had a triple beneficial effect. First, it allowed the Baltics to benefit from positive confidence effects. Second, it allowed Latvia to return to the financial markets well ahead of schedule. Third, it allowed growth to bounce back after exceptionally severe output contractions. In 2011 the Baltic countries were the three best performers in the EU in terms of GDP growth. At a time when all euro area policy-makers urgently seek ways to relaunch growth, this is a remarkable achievement. The concept of “expansionary contraction” has been used and criticised in the ongoing debate about growth and austerity. The Baltic experience provides an indication that this need not be an oxymoron: even if fiscal consolidation weighs on the growth prospects in the short term, it has sizeable positive effects in the medium to long term. But this frontloading approach also proved effective from a political perspective. By acting with speed and determination, the Latvian government was able to capture the sense of urgency prevailing among the population and mobilise it to support adjustment. This way, most of the required painful budgetary decisions could be passed before the so-called “adjustment fatigue” kicked in. The bottom line is this: when adjustment is inevitable, it is better to take the medicine right away than to let the fever rise for months. This is undoubtedly an important factor that explains the different trajectories of the Baltics and certain southern European countries. But fiscal consolidation alone would not have allowed the Baltics to exit the crisis so swiftly. The ECB has long argued that the potential trade-off between fiscal discipline and growth can be mitigated if consolidation is accompanied by growth-enhancing structural reforms. The case of the Baltics confirms this. From a political economy perspective, the Latvian experience also shows that a critical mass of structural reforms is helpful to overcome vested interests. Education, health care, central administration: hardly any public sector category was spared by the reforms. Combined with targeted social safety net measures, this comprehensive approach helped the government to foster public acceptance of change. At the same time, the quality and long-term sustainability of the reforms may – at least initially – have suffered from this approach. Structural reforms are not just about across-the-board cuts but are much more complex and multifaceted. Their overarching objective should be to create a favourable policy environment for growth and wealth creation. But they should also bear in mind equity considerations. In that regard, the IMF, the European Commission and the World Bank provided valuable advice and support to Latvia. I am convinced that we Europeans can and should also step up our technical assistance to countries in need. The Fiscal Compact and the two-pack can provide a good basis for that. To be effective, they should be implemented in a spirit of mutual trust by the Member States and the European Commission. Last but not least, an important lesson from the Baltics relates to the existence of a broad consensus in society. In my view, beyond economic specificities, the key difference between, say, Latvia and Greece lies in the degree of national ownership of the adjustment programme – not only by national policy-makers but also by the population itself. I cannot but emphasise this again: national ownership and public support for the adjustment programme – these are key lessons from the Latvian experience which are of the utmost relevance to the current situation in Greece.In that regard, the communication policy of the government plays a crucial role. This is what a responsible government ought to do:to state that the adjustment is for the country’s own good, and not just to please international lenders; to tell the hard truth; to explain what needs to be done; to be clear what the consequences of non-action or of alternative policy choices would be. All this is conducive to public acceptance of the programme and, therefore, its success. And this is also in the enlightened self-interest of the government, as the electoral reward of the Latvian Prime Minister demonstrates. Beyond economic considerations, the adjustment programme has to be put into a broader context. Political factors can also be key justifications for undertaking difficult economic measures. In the case of the Baltics, the ultimate objective of adopting the euro also has a geostrategic dimension, namely completing their firm anchoring in a Union based on freedom, democracy and human rights. In fact, sharing a currency is more than just drawing economic benefits; it means being part of a community with a shared destiny. This project of political integration justifies making short-term sacrifices to join – or stay within – the euro area. To sum up, a speedy fiscal adjustment, a critical mass of structural reforms and a strong national ownership: these were, in my view, the key ingredients of the Baltic recipe for a quick economic rebound. There is, of course, no silver bullet that could be applied universally to all countries. Nevertheless, euro area policy-makers should look closely at the recent experience of the Baltic countries and draw the appropriate lessons. I see at least one encouraging take-home message: if properly designed and effectively communicated, if fully supported by international lenders, economic adjustment does not necessarily imply political suicide. Being here in Riga, let me conclude with a few observations about the lessons for Latvia itself. The end of the programme should not mean the end of the adjustment efforts. Key challenges remain also for this country to ensure the sustainability of the fiscal adjustment, to strengthen the fundamental drivers of sustainable and balanced growth and to prevent macroeconomic imbalances from building up again. As regards euro adoption, the challenges that some euro area countries are currently facing illustrate clearly the importance of sustainable convergence. Very careful preparation is required to make sure that convergence continues also after euro adoption. Measures to reduce inflation temporarily or easily reversible measures to lower the fiscal deficit do not represent sustainable convergence. The decision to adopt the euro is a very fundamental one and should not be taken lightly.The ECB published its Convergence Report 2012 last week and we came to the conclusion that Latvia does not yet fulfil all convergence requirements. So there is still a way to go for Latvia and the euro will not come for free. But let me state very clearly that the euro area is not a closed club. It is open to any EU Member State that fulfils the convergence criteria on a sustainable basis. The Baltic experience demonstrates that euro membership is not just about economics. The economics alone make only for a partial analysis of the failure or success of an adjustment programme. The political motivations – such as the determination to join the euro area or to safeguard the political capital invested in EMU – have often been underestimated by markets during the crisis. I firmly believe that both economic and political arguments will ultimately also prevail in countries currently in the middle of an adjustment process that is similarly painful to Latvia’s experience. Thank you very much for your attention.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",dear ladi gentlemen pleasur today riga discuss lesson baltic recoveri hanseat leagu riga baltic citi belong commerc polit went hand hand histori never far away headlin day ongo financi sovereign debt crisi illustr yet close econom polit interact good bad would like structur intervent around follow three main question make latvian experi special context current crisi euro area countri learn baltic recoveri latvia learn adjust said good econom often bad polit vice versa experi latvia general baltic worth explor precis defi convent wisdom econom polit first disprov frequent made claim intern devalu strategi cannot work latvia face deepest recess world cumul output declin unemploy peak compar econom collaps even euro area peripher countri fare relat better keep euro peg consid mani mission imposs extern devalu present way forward latvia choos easi quick fix embark courag fiscal consolid path structur reform two year later speed econom rebound extraordinari depth recess odd latvia record real gdp growth rate domest demand main driver growth last year export also recov strong evid latvia competit improv even though mani challeng still lie ahead econom dynam behind swift stabilis recoveri merit close examin equal interest polit economi baltic adjust jeanclaud juncker said know know get reelect afterward say often refer juncker curs unfortun seem confirm crisi vast segment euro area itali greec ireland portug countri govern fell direct result handl econom crisi latvia seem except rule despit harsh auster measur prime minist manag get reelect twice mani rule politician europ day may look upon incredul admir intern devalu strategi effect latvia baltic countri still struggl deep econom polit crisi worth draw lesson baltic experi euro area member countri let start fiscal consolid baltic experi show clear speed essenc three baltic countri govern react swift deterior public financ frontload fiscal adjust budget consolid around gdp alon latvia effort unparallel europ undertak necessari auster measur earli stage tripl benefici effect first allow baltic benefit posit confid effect second allow latvia return financi market well ahead schedul third allow growth bounc back except sever output contract baltic countri three best perform eu term gdp growth time euro area policymak urgent seek way relaunch growth remark achiev concept expansionari contract use criticis ongo debat growth auster baltic experi provid indic need oxymoron even fiscal consolid weigh growth prospect short term sizeabl posit effect medium long term frontload approach also prove effect polit perspect act speed determin latvian govern abl captur sens urgenc prevail among popul mobilis support adjust way requir pain budgetari decis could pass socal adjust fatigu kick bottom line adjust inevit better take medicin right away let fever rise month undoubt import factor explain differ trajectori baltic certain southern european countri fiscal consolid alon would allow baltic exit crisi swift ecb long argu potenti tradeoff fiscal disciplin growth mitig consolid accompani growthenhanc structur reform case baltic confirm polit economi perspect latvian experi also show critic mass structur reform help overcom vest interest educ health care central administr hard public sector categori spare reform combin target social safeti net measur comprehens approach help govern foster public accept chang time qualiti longterm sustain reform may least initi suffer approach structur reform acrosstheboard cut much complex multifacet overarch object creat favour polici environ growth wealth creation also bear mind equiti consider regard imf european commiss world bank provid valuabl advic support latvia convinc european also step technic assist countri need fiscal compact twopack provid good basi effect implement spirit mutual trust member state european commiss last least import lesson baltic relat exist broad consensus societi view beyond econom specif key differ say latvia greec lie degre nation ownership adjust programm nation policymak also popul cannot emphasis nation ownership public support adjust programm key lesson latvian experi utmost relev current situat greec regard communic polici govern play crucial role respons govern ought state adjust countri good pleas intern lender tell hard truth explain need done clear consequ nonact altern polici choic would conduc public accept programm therefor success also enlighten selfinterest govern elector reward latvian prime minist demonstr beyond econom consider adjust programm put broader context polit factor also key justif undertak difficult econom measur case baltic ultim object adopt euro also geostrateg dimens name complet firm anchor union base freedom democraci human right fact share currenc draw econom benefit mean part communiti share destini project polit integr justifi make shortterm sacrific join stay within euro area sum speedi fiscal adjust critic mass structur reform strong nation ownership view key ingredi baltic recip quick econom rebound cours silver bullet could appli univers countri nevertheless euro area policymak look close recent experi baltic countri draw appropri lesson see least one encourag takehom messag proper design effect communic fulli support intern lender econom adjust necessarili impli polit suicid riga let conclud observ lesson latvia end programm mean end adjust effort key challeng remain also countri ensur sustain fiscal adjust strengthen fundament driver sustain balanc growth prevent macroeconom imbal build regard euro adopt challeng euro area countri current face illustr clear import sustain converg care prepar requir make sure converg continu also euro adopt measur reduc inflat temporarili easili revers measur lower fiscal deficit repres sustain converg decis adopt euro fundament one taken light ecb publish converg report last week came conclus latvia yet fulfil converg requir still way go latvia euro come free let state clear euro area close club open eu member state fulfil converg criteria sustain basi baltic experi demonstr euro membership econom econom alon make partial analysi failur success adjust programm polit motiv determin join euro area safeguard polit capit invest emu often underestim market crisi firm believ econom polit argument ultim also prevail countri current middl adjust process similar pain latvia experi thank much attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en