"Lucas Papademos: The effects of globalisation on inflation, liquidity and monetary policy",11-06-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,6485,"<p>My remarks tonight focus on “the effects of globalisation on inflation, liquidity and monetary policy”. This subject has received increasing attention among academic economists and policy-makers over the past two years. Indeed, a number of distinguished participants in this conference have contributed to the ongoing analysis and public debate on this topic. I have observed, however, relatively less emphasis so far on the impact of globalisation on liquidity and the related implications for monetary policy and financial stability. For this reason, I will also devote some time on these aspects. It might be interesting to recall that a number of pertinent issues, which I will also address, were already very topical more than 400 years ago, in 16th century Spain. As a consequence of what, undoubtedly, was one of the first and most impressive periods of globalisation – benefiting Catalonia, however, only 200 years later [1] – significant effects on inflation were observed. Of course, I refer to the Spanish discovery of the Americas and the large influx of gold and silver from the New World. The resulting rise in inflation in Spain quickly spread to Western Europe as a whole.  [2] One is thus tempted to talk about the first evidence of global excess liquidity driving global inflation trends. Economic historians have labelled that inflationary period a ‘price revolution’. [3] Then, as now, there was academic debate, beginning as early as the 16th century, on whether inflation was due to excess liquidity or rather diminishing domestic economic slack linked to urbanisation and income growth. [4] And, I am sure, it was no coincidence that the quantity theory of money was invented by scholars of the School of Salamanca who were inspired by the price revolution period in 16th century Spain. [5] Even the potential links between globalisation, the flattening of the Phillips-curve and the growing importance of global economic slack were issues already debated at that time. Historians tell us that urbanisation also contributed to increased trade between Europe’s regions, which made prices more responsive to distant changes in demand.  Another topical issue I will elaborate on – the link between global excess liquidity and financial stability – also has its roots in 16th century Spain. Rising inflation and the dependency on gold and silver imports are mentioned as causes of multiple bankruptcies and economic crashes.  [6]Following the agenda set by the 16th century globalisation episode, my speech is divided into two main parts. The first part deals with the effects of globalisation on inflation dynamics and price stability from a monetary policy perspective. I will elaborate on the likely impact on product and labour markets as well as the impact on monetary aggregates and financial markets. In the second part, I will reflect on the link between globalisation and financial stability again focusing on the role of central banks. In this context, I will point to the risks associated with global imbalances and asset price boom-and-bust cycles. I will conclude by addressing two pertinent questions, namely (i) whether central banks need to adapt their monetary policy strategies in order to cope with the challenges of globalisation; and (ii) whether monetary policy has become less effective as a consequence of globalisation. As I have already mentioned the term globalisation a number of times, and many more references will follow, let me briefly define it in fairly broad terms: it is the process of rapidly increasing global economic integration. Over the past decade, this process involved, and is evidenced by, the unprecedented and pervasive growth in the cross-border trade of goods and services as well as of financial and real assets, but it also involves the swift transfer of technologies, information and ideas.Let me start by briefly reviewing both the theoretical arguments and the empirical evidence pertaining to the effects of globalisation on product and labour markets. It would be too easy to dismiss any inflationary effects stemming from globalisation with the argument that its impact will essentially and ultimately result in a change in relative prices and that, ceteris paribus, the overall rate of inflation should not be affected. Firstly, integration is not a one-off event. Steadily rising integration could potentially lead to steadily falling unit labour costs and, ceteris paribus, to protracted periods of lower inflation. Secondly, a higher degree of openness, and thus increased competition could lead to permanently higher productivity growth and, again other things being equal, to lower inflation. Thirdly, globalisation could affect other aspects of the inflation process and the conduct of monetary policy: the slope of the Phillips-curve, the wedge between the “socially optimal” and the “natural” or “potential” output level, the “natural rate of unemployment” or NAIRU and even the relative emphasis placed on preserving price stability by the central bank when formulating monetary policy. Thus, globalisation could eventually affect the inflationary impact of supply shocks and, more generally, inflation dynamics and the size of the ‘inflation bias’ in the economy. [7]Many economists and policy-makers have examined the effects of globalisation on one or several of these factors and processes, partly in order to better understand or explain the recent period of low inflation. Interestingly, sometimes the theoretical arguments and empirical findings point in opposite directions: Some have argued that increasing global competition will tend to impinge on domestic monopolistic structures and reduce economic distortions. [8] Furthermore, the slope of the short-term Phillips-curve would increase in the short run as national economies would become more flexible. These two propositions and implied parameter changes imply a permanent reduction in the ‘inflation bias’. Others have argued instead that the slope of the Phillips-curve should become flatter. [9]This reasoning is based on a variety of potential channels: an increased degree of openness reduces the responsiveness of inflation to domestic slack, profit margins become more variable under competitive pressure and wage developments that are influenced by the threat of outsourcing jobs and labour immigration. There are other factors, however, which potentially could flatten the slope of the Phillips-curve – the underlying, structural slope or the estimated, effectively observed slope – and which are not necessarily linked to globalisation: for example, inflation expectations that are well-anchored to price stability and less frequent price updates of firms in a low-inflation environment.Alternative or complementary propositions have also been advanced. It has been argued that the whole debate about the slope of the short-term Phillips-curve is not particularly relevant, if at all. [10] In a highly globalised economic environment, lower inflation could simply be due to a decline in the “natural rate of unemployment” or NAIRU. Importantly, Assaf Razin, among others, has recently shown how the degree of trade and financial integration might both flatten the slope of the short-term Phillips-curve and raise the optimal weight to be placed on the central bank’s inflation objective, when monetary policy maximises consumer preferences. [11] This would lead to the conduct of a more aggressive (optimal) monetary policy in the presence of supply shocks. [12]Not surprisingly, this debate has triggered a series of empiried studies trying to shed more light on the issue. I will focus on evidence for the euro area. In a recent and often-cited BIS paper, Claudio Borio and Andrew Filardo [13] argue that short-term Phillips-curves have become flatter across countries and that measures of global economic slack have become more important than of domestic slack in explaining domestic inflation. Their own results, however, show that this is not the case in the euro area. Moreover, unpublished research at the ECB does not reveal any statistically significant structural breaks with respect to the slope of the euro area Phillips-curve or any decline in the estimated coefficient over time. Other evidence regarding a possible change in the slope of the short-term Phillips-curve in the euro area is also very mixed, especially with regard to the potential effect of increased openness on the slope. [14] The failure to capture econometrically significant globalisation effects could, of course, be due to the relatively recent nature of certain aspects of this phenomenon and the impact of other factors that might have had relatively greater influence on inflation dynamics during the past ten years. For this reason, the potential effects of globalisation on inflation dynamics, through its influence on behavioural or structural features of the labour and product markets, deserves close monitoring and further analysis. The policy relevance of this debate is further complicated by the fact that even if future empirical studies would confirm a significant drop in the responsiveness of inflation to domestic slack in Phillips-curve equations, it is not at all clear whether this should be interpreted as a flattening of the aggregate supply curve in the short term. Such “reduced form” evidence can be observationally equivalent to the evidence that could result from an unchanged structural relationship in an economy where the central bank has been successful in reducing inflation and output volatility, which would correspondingly reduce or could even eliminate the empirical correlation between inflation and the output gap. [15] For this reason, economists and policy-makers have to be particularly careful when using simple reduced form estimated Phillips-curve equations to calculate the NAIRU and then employ the estimated value as a benchmark for assessing inflationary pressure.There are two lessons I derive from this review of theory and evidence. First, there is no consensus at a theoretical level on the relative importance of the various potential effects of globalisation on the inflation process through this channel. Second, the available empirical results provide no clear message either, except that, so far, there is not much evidence to support the view that globalisation has resulted in a flatter Phillips-curve, particularly in the euro area. This situation is, of course, not very comforting for a central banker. The good news is that all studies point toward a lower ‘inflation bias’, although for different reasons.Another related issue is whether, and to what extent, globalisation has affected prices and wages more directly in the euro area product and labour markets in the short-to-medium term. Estimates obtained at the OECD [16], employing an accounting framework suggest that the more direct effect of globalisation (captured by measures of economic openness) on average annual consumer price inflation is within the range of 0.0 to 0.3 percentage points over the period 2000 - 2005. The average size of the estimated impact is not overwhelming, but at least the upper limit of this range is not negligible either. An internal ECB study finds a comparable effect ranging between 0.1 and 0.2 percentage point over the period 1995 - 2004. The net direct impact of globalisation on HICP inflation is the result of two components: an inflation-dampening effect from non‑commodity import prices and an inflation-augmenting effect from commodity import prices, including oil prices. The two effects are of course linked and may largely offset each other as the economic success of emerging market economies is largely responsible for higher world commodity prices. Moreover, the interpretation of such estimated effects is not straightforward. The domestic economy’s response to the emergence of new international low-cost competitors is not captured by these estimates. Furthermore, it is not clear to what extent and for how long these effects should be expected to persist. The empirical evidence on the direct impact of globalisation on labour markets is also mixed. Indeed, it seems that the findings are getting less rather than more robust and it may be difficult to disentangle the effects of globalisation from those resulting from technological advances. In theory, it could be expected that the increased openness of the economies may affect the demand for labour by firms in advanced economies directly, as a result of increased international competition and, indirectly, by increasing the real wage elasticity of labour demand. There is some evidence confirming these theoretical propositions.  [17] The quadrupling of the effective global labour force over the last twenty years has led to a fall in the labour share of unskilled workers’ sectors in advanced economies and to a – more moderate – rise in the labour share of skilled workers’ sectors. In the euro area, shifts in labour demand are predominantly resulting in changes in employment rather than in wages. The IMF concludes, however, that technological advances had an even bigger impact on the labour share of unskilled workers’ sectors than globalisation as such. As you are aware, the ECB’s monetary policy strategy attributes a prominent role to the analysis of monetary aggregates and its counterparts in the assessment of risks to price stability over the medium to longer run. Two processes associated with globalisation have made the analysis of monetary aggregates for the purpose of extracting information for assessing future risks to price stability more complex. [18]The first process is the growing size of international capital flows. The sum of the stocks of foreign assets and foreign liabilities of the total economy as a percentage of GDP – the most frequently used measure of financial globalisation – has increased threefold in advanced economies between the early 1990s and 2004. [19] In the euro area alone, the sum of outstanding foreign assets and liabilities has increased from 190% of GDP in 1999 to 280% in 2005. [20] With larger stocks of foreign assets and liabilities, the probability of occasionally large and volatile net flows has risen. When euro area residents sell securities to non euro area residents or when they borrow abroad, the net external assets of monetary and financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area rise and the stock of broad money (M3) expands, if the settlement of these transactions involves domestic and foreign banks. Cross-border mergers & acquisitions (M&A) activity of non-financial corporations can also account for a parallel change in net foreign assets and money. Both cross-border portfolio investments and M&A activity are genuine elements of the process of globalisation. Unfortunately, simply accounting for the external sources of money growth and then mechanically correcting for cross-border portfolio flows or M&A activity, on the presumption of their likely remote direct effects on consumer prices, is not an advisable option. Rather, these transactions have to be analysed with respect to their information content concerning their potential wealth effects on residents’ income and on asset prices. [21] Depending on the outcome of this analysis, the policy implications could be far from negligible.The second process is financial innovation. The increasingly global nature of financial markets and the low level of world interest rates in recent years have fostered financial innovation. These developments, in turn, have contributed to the rapid growth of the activities of Other Financial Intermediaries (OFIs), which include investment funds, financial vehicle corporations as well as dealers in securities and derivative products. While the overall share of OFIs’ money holdings in M3 is only about 10% in the euro area so far – households account for about 50% – OFIs have contributed significantly to the annual growth of euro area M3 since 2005, adding up to 2 percentage points in some months, mainly due to the emergence and expansion of loan securitisation. The motives of OFIs for holding money balances are likely to be of a fundamentally different nature than those of households or non-financial corporations. Moreover, the process of securitisation of loans itself positively affects the capacity of banks (of MFIs, to be precise), to issue new loans and thus it could have an indirect expansionary effect on M3 growth. How can we deal with the influence of these factors on money creation and their potential effects on the medium and long-term inflation outlook? In general, the same answer applies as with respect to changes in net external assets. Given that the OFIs’ money holdings and investment activities could have indirect effects on consumer price developments via asset prices, it would be premature to automatically exclude, without further analysis, the money balances held by OFIs from the monetary aggregates when assessing the risks to price stability. [22] The general conclusion that emerges from these considerations is that monetary analysis has become more challenging in the global economy as it has to explicitly take account of changes in domestic money and credit markets induced by, or accompanying, financial globalisation. To address this challenge, the Eurosystem is currently stepping up its analytical efforts to deepen its understanding of several aspects of these processes and their implications for the assessment of medium to longer-term risks to price stability.A second set of important issues I would like to briefly address concerns the potential effects of financial globalisation on financial stability. The safeguarding of financial stability is an objective embedded, to varying degrees, in central bank statutes, reflecting national or area-wide institutional arrangements. But in all cases, a sufficient degree of financial stability is a necessary condition for the preservation of price stability by central banks. Globalisation could have implications for financial stability through various channels; I will focus on its potential implications through its effects on global imbalances and asset price cycles.Incomplete financial globalisation [23], reflecting the low level of financial market development in otherwise fast-growing emerging market economies, combined with the “savings glut” hypothesis, can partly account for the current level and evolution of global net foreign asset and liability positions. This explanation notwithstanding, the possibility of a disorderly unwinding of global imbalances cannot be excluded for several reasons. First, the structural factors underlying the large financial flows from Asia and oil-exporting countries into the United States cannot persist forever. Second, economic policies which have been causing, or have thus far failed to address, a variety of market distortions and inefficiencies, have also been contributing to existing financial imbalances. Financial market participants may eventually question the sustainability of some of these policies and change their behaviour in anticipation of their ultimate consequences. There is no doubt that financial globalisation fosters international risk sharing, promotes economic growth and reduces macroeconomic volatility. Nevertheless, the size of and the particular asymmetry in net foreign asset positions observed since the late 1990s involves potential medium to longer term risks to financial stability. Major and abrupt asset price adjustments, associated with a disorderly unwinding of global financial imbalances, could be the main propagation mechanism of a financial turbulence. I would like to add, however, that currently the probability of such a disorderly unwinding scenario seems rather remote, as economic policies are shifting in the right direction, although clearly more needs to be done. Furthermore, as shown by ECB research, historically, the necessary rebalancing of global demand in periods of current account adjustment was usually achieved in an orderly fashion and involved domestic demand and supply reallocations and did not require major asset price movements. [24] The potential role of monetary policy with regard to global imbalances has been examined but the conclusions are not clear. Research at the ECB has shown how the combined affects of domestic monetary policy, fiscal policy and productivity developments could influence current account positions. [25] Related exchange rate movements could lead to additional valuation affects with implications for gross foreign asset and liability positions. One interesting question to explore is whether the conduct of symmetric monetary policies – for example, in two countries linked by a fixed exchange rate regime – could affect the relative current account position between these countries. Such an outcome could reflect asymmetries in the interest elasticities of saving and different wealth effects related to heterogeneous financial market development and capitalisation. But these issues, though theoretically interesting, are very much unchartered territory. [26] Let me now turn to the potential impact of financial globalisation on financial stability through the effects on asset prices and risk premia. As colleagues at the BIS were first to emphasise, a potential interaction between globalisation and monetary policy may inadvertently contribute to the creation of global excess liquidity which could later play a role in the development of asset price boom-and-bust cycles. The benign effects of global competition and low-cost imports on consumer prices might lead to an underestimation of the stimulative effects of monetary policy which is consistent with the preservation of price stability over the medium term, but which can be characterised as accommodative as evidenced by buoyant credit and money growth over a prolonged period. A strong and persistent expansion of monetary liquidity could fuel or even trigger an asset price boom. During the bust phase of the asset price cycle, the associated credit crunch might lead to an economic downturn and a negative deviation from the objective of consumer price stability, and possibly even to deflation, which would exacerbate the financial crisis. The channel through which monetary liquidity could affect the dynamics of asset prices could be “purely monetarist” or reflect the influence of other factors as more recently explained with reference to behavioural finance. An environment of high monetary liquidity could affect the risk-taking behaviour of financial intermediaries and other financial market participants. High monetary liquidity and financial market liquidity [27] could be signs of arbitrage strategies such as carry trades and “liquidity seeking” behaviour, which could temporarily distort the pricing of risk. [28] In fact, ECB research shows that there is evidence that monetary liquidity shocks have played a role in driving asset prices, particularly housing prices across OECD countries, during the boom phase of asset price cycles, and that they have also contributed to explaining the negative effects on economic activity during the subsequent bust phase. [29] Other Eurosystem research has identified effects of an accommodative monetary policy on housing prices in the euro area and in the United States. [30] The intriguing aspect of this hypothesis and of the associated empirical findings is that the monetary policy stance might be perfectly appropriate for and consistent with the preservation of price stability over a short-to-medium term horizon. Nevertheless, the potential implications for asset price boom-and-bust cycles could signal that the monetary policy stance could prove too accommodative for maintaining price stability in the long run.I would like to conclude by addressing the two questions that I raised at the beginning which concern the potential implications of globalisation for the strategy and effectiveness of monetary policy. More specifically, the first question is whether monetary policy strategies have to be adapted in order to cope with the rapidly increasing global economic integration. In providing an answer, I will concentrate on and highlight the ECB’s monetary policy strategy.A monetary policy strategy comprised two main elements: the policy objective, including the time horizon for its attainment, and the analytical framework which relates policy instruments and goals and provides the basis for assessing the prospects for attaining the policy objective and the associated risks. The ECB’s strategy includes a quantitative definition of its primary objective of preserving price stability and has a medium-term orientation in achieving this goal. Globalisation has no fundamental bearing on this element of the strategy, but it has some implications: it does underscore the relative importance of price stability as a central bank goal and the need to formulate and conduct monetary policy so as to preserve price stability over a medium-to-longer term horizon. As I noted earlier, recent research has stressed that increased openness to trade and financial interdependence should reinforce the central bank’s emphasis on the objective of price stability relative to minimising output volatility. [31] Such a result can also be derived in a model with endogenous portfolio choices, while focusing on the risk-sharing properties of cross-border trade in nominal bonds.  [32] Moreover, in an environment of price stability but persistent rapid money growth and rising leverage, financial liberalisation and integration could lead to the accumulation of financial imbalances over a number of years, increasing the probability of a boom-and-bust cycle in financial markets with repercussion on price stability over the longer term. This possibility implies that monetary policy should place increased emphasis on the preservation of price stability over longer time horizon extending beyond the medium term.With regard to the analytical framework, globalisation can, in principle, affect market structures, agent’s behaviour and inflation dynamics, thus requiring close monitoring and careful assessment of its effects. The economic analysis employed by the ECB to assess the short-to-medium term risks to price stability could be subject to greater parameter or model uncertainty as well as increased measurement error associated with unobservable variables, such as potential output, which underlie the assessment of real activity and inflation pressure. However, the econometric evidence in the euro area has not yet identified significant indirect effects, reflecting structural or behavioural influence of globalisation on inflation dynamics. Nevertheless, the complexity of economic analysis has increased and its task has become more challenging, and there is clearly a need to better understand and measure the impact of globalisation.In a period of potentially significant structural change in the product and labour markets, cross-checking the assessment of risks based on economic analysis by monetary analysis becomes more important. This proposition is conceptually correct. Unfortunately, the influences of financial globalisation on money and credit growth imply that, in practice, monetary analysis is also becoming more challenging and requires increased sophistication. It is necessary to rely on a wide range of analytical tools and models in order to identify the underlying trend in monetary developments and to assess its implications for price stability. At the same time, as I already stressed, in an environment of increased global financial integration, a deeper and broader analysis of developments in monetary liquidity can enhance our understanding of potential risks to financial stability which, if they materialise, can have repercussions for output volatility and price stability over the longer term. For these reasons, pertinent research at the ECB will be further strengthened, including the analysis of the interactions between financial globalisation and innovation, on the one hand, and monetary and market liquidity, on the other, and their potential implications for monetary policy and financial stability.All in all, there is no reason to change in any fundamental way the analytical framework we employ for assessing the prospects for and the risks to price stability in response to globalisation. On the contrary, I conclude that the ECB’s strategy, with its medium-to-longer term orientation and the prominence it assigns to the analysis of monetary developments and liquidity conditions for cross-checking the outcome of economic analyses, is well placed to address some of the implications of globalisation for inflation dynamics and long-term financial and price stability. Nevertheless an improved understanding of the influence of globalisation on the monetary policy transmission mechanism will enhance the analysis underlying our decisions. This brings me to the second and last question on policy effectiveness. Has monetary policy become less effective as a consequence of increased financial integration? More specifically, has the associated co-movement of long-term interest rates impaired the functioning of one of the channels of the monetary policy transmission mechanism? Or, alternatively, has monetary policy gained effectiveness in times of almost perfect capital mobility and floating exchange rates, in line with the IS/LM paradigm, as recently stressed by central bank colleagues?  [33] Indeed, it is theoretically plausible to argue that certain features of globalisation have influenced to varying degrees some of the key determinants of long-term interest rates, such as the global riskless real rate of interest and the real risk premium. [34] In addition, expected inflation and the inflation risk premium may have been diminished to some degree by forces of globalisation, though successful monetary policy across the globe has certainly been the main factor. There is some empirical evidence that in the euro area, as well as in a broader sample of OECD countries, long-term rates are reacting less to changes in short-term rates than they used to.  [35] Global factors seem to be increasingly important for the determination of national real bond yields. [36] Furthermore, the co-movement of US, German and Japanese bond yields has been exceptionally high over the last three years. [37] My interpretation of these findings is that, although there is little doubt that global forces have played an important role in the determination of domestic long-term interest rates, they do not provide sufficient and convincing evidence to conclude that the effectiveness of monetary policy in controlling inflation has been reduced. The increased significance of global factors identified by empirical analysis is likely to reflect common trends as well as the similar orientation of monetary policies and their success in containing inflationary pressures. But nothing prevents national monetary policies from diverging from such a common orientation, which itself has been fostered by increasing competition between currencies. [38] A central bank is still able to preserve price stability, or choose and achieve a long-term inflation objective under floating exchange rates. However, the relative importance of the different channels of transmission of the effects of monetary policy might be affected by the ongoing global economic integration. This underscores the importance of a central bank’s credible commitment to its objectives and of effective and consistent communication. [39] To sum up, the effects of globalisation on product, labour and financial markets can be potentially far-reaching. However, the implications for monetary policy are overall fairly contained. The phenomenon of globalisation neither calls for any fundamental change in the monetary policy strategy nor it affects in any material way the general effectiveness of monetary policy. Globalisation implies a greater emphasis on the price stability objective over a medium to longer-term horizon. It also implies that, monetary analysis has become more challenging but at the same time relatively more important for assessing long-term risks to price stability and financial stability. Moreover, globalisation can affect the relative significance and the functioning of some channels of the monetary policy transmission mechanism, but the available empirical evidence for the euro area suggests that such effects are limited so far. In this context, I would favour the approach of the German writer, philosopher and engineer Novalis, who mentioned that “hypotheses are like nets; only those who throw nets will catch fish”. Clearly, more research is essential. We need close monitoring and careful analysis of the empirical evidence as well as an improved understanding of the influence of globalisation on the monetary policy transmission mechanism. This will help improve the quality and robustness of the analysis underlying our ability to continue to fulfil our mandate to maintain price stability and to contribute to the safeguarding of financial stability. With this objective in mind and judging from the programme of this conference, I have the highest expectations that, after a brilliant start today, the next two days will also significantly advance our understanding and knowledge of these important issues. Thank you very much for your attention.Adalid, R. and Detken, C. (2007), Liquidity Shocks and Asset Price Boom/Bust Cycles, European Central Bank Working Paper Series, No. 732.Algieri, B., and Bracke, T. (2007), Patterns of Current Account Adjustment – Insights from Past Experience, Mimeo, ECB.Barro, R. J. and Sala-i-Martin, X. (1990), World Real Interest Rates, National Bureau of Economic Research Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 5.Bean, C., (2005), Monetary Policy in an Uncertain World, Oxonia Distinguished Speakers Seminar, The Oxford Institute of Economic Policy, Oxford, 22 February.Bean, C. (2006a), Comments on Ken Rogoff: “Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy” at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 30th Annual Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 26 August.Bean, C. (2006b), Globalisation and Inflation, Speech to LSE Economics Society, London School of Economics, 24 October.Bems, R. and Dedola, L. (2006), Current Account Reversals and Capital Markets Integration: The Adjustment of the US External Position Revisited, Mimeo, ECB.Bems, R., Dedola, L. and Smets, F. (2007), “US Imbalances: the Role of Technology and Policy”, ECB Working Paper, No. 719.Bernholz, P. and P. Kugler (2007), The Price Revolution in the 16th Century: Empirical Results from a Strucutral Vectorautoregression Model, Working Paper University of Basle.Bini Smaghi, L. (2007), Global Capital and National Monetary Policies, Speech at the European Economic and Financial Centre, London, 18 January.Borio, C. and Filardo, A. (2007), Globalisation and inflation: New cross-country evidence on the global determinants of domestic inflation, BIS Working Papers No. 227.Boivin, J. and Giannoni, M. P. (2006), Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(3): 445-462, (January 2003) NBER Working Paper Series, No. 9459.Ciccarelli, M. and Mojon, B. (2005), Global Inflation, ECB Working Paper Series, No. 537.Dedola, L. (2006), Global Imbalances and “Excess Liquidity”: Is There a Link?, ECB, Directorate General Research, Research Bulletin, No. 4.Detken, C. (2006), “Comment on The Bond Yield ‘Conundrum’ from a Macro-Finance Perspective” Monetary and Economic Studies, 24 (S-1), Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, pp. 109-119.Devereux, M. B. and Sutherland, A. (2007), Financial Globalization and Monetary Policy, Discussion Paper Series No. 6147, International Macroeconomics, Centre for Economic Policy Research.Engler, P., Fidora, M. and Thimann, C. (2007), External Imbalances and the US Current Account: Do Supply-side Changes Lessen the Exchange Rate Adjustment? Mimeo, ECB.European Central Bank (a), Financial Stability Review (forthcoming June 2007). European Central Bank (b), Monthly Bulletin article, (forthcoming July 2007), Interpreting monetary developments since mid-2004.Ferguson, R., Hartmann, P., Panetta, F., Portes, R. (2007), International Financial Stability, Draft Report prepared for ICMB Conference, Geneva, 3-4 May.Ferrero, G., Nobili, A. and Passiglia, P. (2007), The Sectoral Distribution of Money Supply in the Euro Area, Temi di discussione, Banca d’Italia. Frankel, J. (2006), What Do Economists Mean by Globalization? Implications for Inflation and Monetary Policy, Written for Academic Consultants Meeting, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.Fratzscher, M., Juvenal, L. and Sarno, L. (2007), Asset Prices, Exchange Rates and the Current Account, ECB, Mimeo, March.Giannone, D., Lenza, M. and Reichlin, L. (2007), The Equilibrium Level of the World Real Interest Rate; Paper to be presented at the First Annual Risk Management Institute Research Conference “Capital Flows and Asset Price: The International Dimension of Risk”, Singapore 6-7 July.Gnan, E. and Valderama, M. T. (2006), Globalization, Inflation and Monetary Policy, Monetary Policy & The Economy.Greiber, C. and Setzer, R. (2007), Money and Housing – Evidence for the Euro Area and the US, Deutsche Bundesbank, Economics DepartmentHamilton, E. (1934), American Treasure and the Price Revolution in Spain, 1501-1650, Harvard Economic Studies, 43; Cambridge: Harvard University Press.Ihrig, J., Kamin, S. B., Lindner, D. and Marques, J. (2007), Some Simple Tests of the Globalization and Inflation Hypothesis, International Finance Discussion Papers, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, No. 891.International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook (2007), The Globalization of Labor, Chapter 5. Kroszner, R. S. (2007), Globalization and Capital Markets: Implications for Inflation and the Yield Curve, Remarks at the Center for Financial Stability (CEF), Buenos Aires, Argentina,16 May.Landesberger von, J. (2007), Sectoral Money Demand Models for the Euro Area based on a Common Set of Determinants, ECB Working Paper, No. 741.Munro, J. (1994), Patterns of Trade, Money, and Credit, in Tracy, J., Brady, T. and Oberman, H. eds., Handbook of European History: The Later Middle Ages, Renaissance and Reformation, 1400-1600, Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1994-95Pain, N., Koske, I. and Sollie, M. (2006), Globalisation and Inflation in the OECD Economies, Economics Department Working Papers No. 524.Papademos, L. (2006), Monetary Policy in a Changing World: Commitment, Strategy and Credibility, Speech at the Fourth Conference of the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Washington D.C, 1 December.Pepper, G. with Olivier, M. (2006), The Liquidity Theory of Asset Prices. Wiley Finance.Rajan, R. (2005), Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier? NBER Working Paper No. 11728.Rajan, R. (2006), Monetary Policy and Incentives, in Fernández de Lis, S. and Restoy, F., Central Banks in the 21st Century, Proceedings of an international conference sponsored by the Banco de España; Madrid, Banco de España.Razin, A. and Binyamini, A. (2007), Flattening of the Short-run Trade-off between Inflation and Domestic Activity, Paper presented at the Symposium on “The Phillips Curve and the Natural Rate of Unemployment”, Kiel Institute of World Economy, 3-4 June.Reichlin, L. (2006), Panel remarks at the Thirteenth International Conference “Financial Markets and the Real Economy in a Low Interest Rate Environment” Bank of Japan, Tokyo.Rogoff, K. (2004), Globalization and Global Disinflation, International Monetary Fund, paper prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City conference on “Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy”, Jackson Hole, WY, 28-30 August 2003.Rogoff, K. (2006), Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy, Harvard University (prepared for symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City on “The New Economic Geography: Effects and Policy Implications” Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 24-26 August).Romer, D. (1993), “Openness and Inflation: Theory and Evidence” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108.Smith, A. (1776), An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, edited by C. J. Bullock. Vol. X. The Harvard Classics. New York: P.F. Collier & Son, 1909–14.Weber, A. (2007), Challenges Posed by (Financial) Globalisation, Lecture at the University of Pune, Pune, 15 March.Wu, T. (2006), Globalization’s Effect on Interest Rates and the Yield Curve, Economic Letter – Insights from the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Vol. 1, No. 9.Yellen, J. L. (2006), Monetary Policy in a Global Environment, Speech at The Euro and the Dollar in a Globalized Economy Conference, U.C. Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, 27 May.[1] In 1778, Catalonia was allowed to trade with the Americas by decree of Charles III. [2] Adam Smith estimated that “the discovery of the abundant mines of America reduced, in the sixteenth century, the value of gold and silver in Europe to about a third of what it had been before.” See Smith, 1776.[3] Hamilton, 1934.[4] Bernholz and Kugler, 2007.[5] Navarro, one of the most famous scholars of the School of Salamanca wrote in 1566 that “Other things being equal, in countries where there is a great scarcity of money, all other saleable goods, and even the hands and labour of men, are given for less money than where it is abundant.”[6] See, for example, Munro, 1994.[7] “Inflation bias” in this context refers to the component of inflation which results from the implementation of time‑inconsistent policies when nominal rigidities create an incentive for policy-makers to reduce unemployment by exploiting the short-run trade-off between inflation and unemployment.[8] Rogoff, 2004, 2006. See Romer 1993 for a similar argument related to openness as a factor that leads to increasing t costs of an inflationary monetary policy due to fears of capital outflows. [9] See, for example, Bean 2006a, 2006b.[10] Frankel, 2006.[11] Razin and Binyamini, 2007.[12] It would also reduce the inflation bias, as the effect on the bias of a larger weight on the inflation objective dominates that of the flatter Phillips-curve in this model. [13] Borio and Filardo, 2007.[14] Gnan and Valderrama, 2006; Ihrig et al., 2007; IMF, 2006; Bean, 2005; see also Ciccarelli and Mojon, 2006, who find that global factors have greater explanatory power in determining domestic inflation.[15] Boivin and Giannoni, 2006 and Bean, 2005.[16] Pain et al. (2006).[17] International Monetary Fund, 2007.[18] See ECB Financial Stability Review, June 2007; ECB Monthly Bulletin, July 2007, forthcoming; Ferrero et al., 2007; von Landesberger, 2007.[19] Ferguson et al.[20] Over the same horizon, the net foreign liability position of the euro area only increased from 6.5% to 10% of GDP.[21] See, for example, the description of the link between M&A activity and asset prices in Pepper, 2006. [22] ECB Monthly Bulletin, July 2007, forthcoming.[23] Bini-Smaghi, 2006.[24] Bems and Dedola, 2006, Algieri and Bracke 2006, Engler et al. 2006, Fratzscher, Juvenal and Sarno, 2007. [25] Bems, Dedola, Smets, 2007.[26] See Dedola, 2006 for a discussion of this hypothesis.[27] See ECB Financial Stability Review, June 2007, Box 9 for a discussion of the concepts of monetary and financial liquidity.[28] Rajan, 2005 and 2006.[29] Adalid and Detken, 2007; and Detken, 2006 with respect to link between liquidity and low bond yields. [30] Greiber and Setzer, 2007.[31] Razin and Binyamini, 2007.[32] Devereux, 2007. [33] See Yellen, 2006 and Weber, 2007.[34] Wu, 2006.[35] Reichlin, 2006.[36] Giannone, Lenza, Reichlin, 2007. Interestingly already Barro and Sala-I-Martin in their classic 1990 article found that real interest rates for seven of the nine OECD countries they investigated mainly depended on world factors for the period 1958-1989.[37] Ferguson et al.[38] See Kroszner, 2007.[39] See Papademos (2006).Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",remark tonight focus effect globalis inflat liquid monetari polici subject receiv increas attent among academ economist policymak past two year inde number distinguish particip confer contribut ongo analysi public debat topic observ howev relat less emphasi far impact globalis liquid relat implic monetari polici financi stabil reason also devot time aspect might interest recal number pertin issu also address alreadi topic year ago th centuri spain consequ undoubt one first impress period globalis benefit catalonia howev year later signific effect inflat observ cours refer spanish discoveri america larg influx gold silver new world result rise inflat spain quick spread western europ whole one thus tempt talk first evid global excess liquid drive global inflat trend econom historian label inflationari period price revolut academ debat begin earli th centuri whether inflat due excess liquid rather diminish domest econom slack link urbanis incom growth sure coincid quantiti theori money invent scholar school salamanca inspir price revolut period th centuri spain even potenti link globalis flatten phillipscurv grow import global econom slack issu alreadi debat time historian tell us urbanis also contribut increas trade europ region made price respons distant chang demand anoth topic issu elabor link global excess liquid financi stabil also root th centuri spain rise inflat depend gold silver import mention caus multipl bankruptci econom crash follow agenda set th centuri globalis episod speech divid two main part first part deal effect globalis inflat dynam price stabil monetari polici perspect elabor like impact product labour market well impact monetari aggreg financi market second part reflect link globalis financi stabil focus role central bank context point risk associ global imbal asset price boomandbust cycl conclud address two pertin question name whether central bank need adapt monetari polici strategi order cope challeng globalis ii whether monetari polici becom less effect consequ globalis alreadi mention term globalis number time mani refer follow let briefli defin fair broad term process rapid increas global econom integr past decad process involv evidenc unpreced pervas growth crossbord trade good servic well financi real asset also involv swift transfer technolog inform idea let start briefli review theoret argument empir evid pertain effect globalis product labour market would easi dismiss inflationari effect stem globalis argument impact essenti ultim result chang relat price ceteri paribus overal rate inflat affect first integr oneoff event steadili rise integr could potenti lead steadili fall unit labour cost ceteri paribus protract period lower inflat second higher degre open thus increas competit could lead perman higher product growth thing equal lower inflat third globalis could affect aspect inflat process conduct monetari polici slope phillipscurv wedg social optim natur potenti output level natur rate unemploy nairu even relat emphasi place preserv price stabil central bank formul monetari polici thus globalis could eventu affect inflationari impact suppli shock general inflat dynam size inflat bias economi mani economist policymak examin effect globalis one sever factor process part order better understand explain recent period low inflat interest sometim theoret argument empir find point opposit direct argu increas global competit tend imping domest monopolist structur reduc econom distort furthermor slope shortterm phillipscurv would increas short run nation economi would becom flexibl two proposit impli paramet chang impli perman reduct inflat bias other argu instead slope phillipscurv becom flatter reason base varieti potenti channel increas degre open reduc respons inflat domest slack profit margin becom variabl competit pressur wage develop influenc threat outsourc job labour immigr factor howev potenti could flatten slope phillipscurv under structur slope estim effect observ slope necessarili link globalis exampl inflat expect wellanchor price stabil less frequent price updat firm lowinfl environ altern complementari proposit also advanc argu whole debat slope shortterm phillipscurv particular relev high globalis econom environ lower inflat could simpli due declin natur rate unemploy nairu import assaf razin among other recent shown degre trade financi integr might flatten slope shortterm phillipscurv rais optim weight place central bank inflat object monetari polici maximis consum prefer would lead conduct aggress optim monetari polici presenc suppli shock surpris debat trigger seri empiri studi tri shed light issu focus evid euro area recent oftencit bis paper claudio borio andrew filardo argu shortterm phillipscurv becom flatter across countri measur global econom slack becom import domest slack explain domest inflat result howev show case euro area moreov unpublish research ecb reveal statist signific structur break respect slope euro area phillipscurv declin estim coeffici time evid regard possibl chang slope shortterm phillipscurv euro area also mix especi regard potenti effect increas open slope failur captur econometr signific globalis effect could cours due relat recent natur certain aspect phenomenon impact factor might relat greater influenc inflat dynam past ten year reason potenti effect globalis inflat dynam influenc behaviour structur featur labour product market deserv close monitor analysi polici relev debat complic fact even futur empir studi would confirm signific drop respons inflat domest slack phillipscurv equat clear whether interpret flatten aggreg suppli curv short term reduc form evid observ equival evid could result unchang structur relationship economi central bank success reduc inflat output volatil would correspond reduc could even elimin empir correl inflat output gap reason economist policymak particular care use simpl reduc form estim phillipscurv equat calcul nairu employ estim valu benchmark assess inflationari pressur two lesson deriv review theori evid first consensus theoret level relat import various potenti effect globalis inflat process channel second avail empir result provid clear messag either except far much evid support view globalis result flatter phillipscurv particular euro area situat cours comfort central banker good news studi point toward lower inflat bias although differ reason anoth relat issu whether extent globalis affect price wage direct euro area product labour market shorttomedium term estim obtain oecd employ account framework suggest direct effect globalis captur measur econom open averag annual consum price inflat within rang percentag point period averag size estim impact overwhelm least upper limit rang neglig either intern ecb studi find compar effect rang percentag point period net direct impact globalis hicp inflat result two compon inflationdampen effect non commod import price inflationaug effect commod import price includ oil price two effect cours link may larg offset econom success emerg market economi larg respons higher world commod price moreov interpret estim effect straightforward domest economi respons emerg new intern lowcost competitor captur estim furthermor clear extent long effect expect persist empir evid direct impact globalis labour market also mix inde seem find get less rather robust may difficult disentangl effect globalis result technolog advanc theori could expect increas open economi may affect demand labour firm advanc economi direct result increas intern competit indirect increas real wage elast labour demand evid confirm theoret proposit quadrupl effect global labour forc last twenti year led fall labour share unskil worker sector advanc economi moder rise labour share skill worker sector euro area shift labour demand predomin result chang employ rather wage imf conclud howev technolog advanc even bigger impact labour share unskil worker sector globalis awar ecb monetari polici strategi attribut promin role analysi monetari aggreg counterpart assess risk price stabil medium longer run two process associ globalis made analysi monetari aggreg purpos extract inform assess futur risk price stabil complex first process grow size intern capit flow sum stock foreign asset foreign liabil total economi percentag gdp frequent use measur financi globalis increas threefold advanc economi earli euro area alon sum outstand foreign asset liabil increas gdp larger stock foreign asset liabil probabl occasion larg volatil net flow risen euro area resid sell secur non euro area resid borrow abroad net extern asset monetari financi institut mfis euro area rise stock broad money m expand settlement transact involv domest foreign bank crossbord merger acquisit m activ nonfinanci corpor also account parallel chang net foreign asset money crossbord portfolio invest m activ genuin element process globalis unfortun simpli account extern sourc money growth mechan correct crossbord portfolio flow m activ presumpt like remot direct effect consum price advis option rather transact analys respect inform content concern potenti wealth effect resid incom asset price depend outcom analysi polici implic could far neglig second process financi innov increas global natur financi market low level world interest rate recent year foster financi innov develop turn contribut rapid growth activ financi intermediari ofi includ invest fund financi vehicl corpor well dealer secur deriv product overal share ofi money hold m euro area far household account ofi contribut signific annual growth euro area m sinc ad percentag point month main due emerg expans loan securitis motiv ofi hold money balanc like fundament differ natur household nonfinanci corpor moreov process securitis loan posit affect capac bank mfis precis issu new loan thus could indirect expansionari effect m growth deal influenc factor money creation potenti effect medium longterm inflat outlook general answer appli respect chang net extern asset given ofi money hold invest activ could indirect effect consum price develop via asset price would prematur automat exclud without analysi money balanc held ofi monetari aggreg assess risk price stabil general conclus emerg consider monetari analysi becom challeng global economi explicit take account chang domest money credit market induc accompani financi globalis address challeng eurosystem current step analyt effort deepen understand sever aspect process implic assess medium longerterm risk price stabil second set import issu would like briefli address concern potenti effect financi globalis financi stabil safeguard financi stabil object embed vari degre central bank statut reflect nation areawid institut arrang case suffici degre financi stabil necessari condit preserv price stabil central bank globalis could implic financi stabil various channel focus potenti implic effect global imbal asset price cycl incomplet financi globalis reflect low level financi market develop otherwis fastgrow emerg market economi combin save glut hypothesi part account current level evolut global net foreign asset liabil posit explan notwithstand possibl disord unwind global imbal cannot exclud sever reason first structur factor under larg financi flow asia oilexport countri unit state cannot persist forev second econom polici caus thus far fail address varieti market distort ineffici also contribut exist financi imbal financi market particip may eventu question sustain polici chang behaviour anticip ultim consequ doubt financi globalis foster intern risk share promot econom growth reduc macroeconom volatil nevertheless size particular asymmetri net foreign asset posit observ sinc late involv potenti medium longer term risk financi stabil major abrupt asset price adjust associ disord unwind global financi imbal could main propag mechan financi turbul would like add howev current probabl disord unwind scenario seem rather remot econom polici shift right direct although clear need done furthermor shown ecb research histor necessari rebalanc global demand period current account adjust usual achiev order fashion involv domest demand suppli realloc requir major asset price movement potenti role monetari polici regard global imbal examin conclus clear research ecb shown combin affect domest monetari polici fiscal polici product develop could influenc current account posit relat exchang rate movement could lead addit valuat affect implic gross foreign asset liabil posit one interest question explor whether conduct symmetr monetari polici exampl two countri link fix exchang rate regim could affect relat current account posit countri outcom could reflect asymmetri interest elast save differ wealth effect relat heterogen financi market develop capitalis issu though theoret interest much unchart territori let turn potenti impact financi globalis financi stabil effect asset price risk premia colleagu bis first emphasis potenti interact globalis monetari polici may inadvert contribut creation global excess liquid could later play role develop asset price boomandbust cycl benign effect global competit lowcost import consum price might lead underestim stimul effect monetari polici consist preserv price stabil medium term characteris accommod evidenc buoyant credit money growth prolong period strong persist expans monetari liquid could fuel even trigger asset price boom bust phase asset price cycl associ credit crunch might lead econom downturn negat deviat object consum price stabil possibl even deflat would exacerb financi crisi channel monetari liquid could affect dynam asset price could pure monetarist reflect influenc factor recent explain refer behaviour financ environ high monetari liquid could affect risktak behaviour financi intermediari financi market particip high monetari liquid financi market liquid could sign arbitrag strategi carri trade liquid seek behaviour could temporarili distort price risk fact ecb research show evid monetari liquid shock play role drive asset price particular hous price across oecd countri boom phase asset price cycl also contribut explain negat effect econom activ subsequ bust phase eurosystem research identifi effect accommod monetari polici hous price euro area unit state intrigu aspect hypothesi associ empir find monetari polici stanc might perfect appropri consist preserv price stabil shorttomedium term horizon nevertheless potenti implic asset price boomandbust cycl could signal monetari polici stanc could prove accommod maintain price stabil long run would like conclud address two question rais begin concern potenti implic globalis strategi effect monetari polici specif first question whether monetari polici strategi adapt order cope rapid increas global econom integr provid answer concentr highlight ecb monetari polici strategi monetari polici strategi compris two main element polici object includ time horizon attain analyt framework relat polici instrument goal provid basi assess prospect attain polici object associ risk ecb strategi includ quantit definit primari object preserv price stabil mediumterm orient achiev goal globalis fundament bear element strategi implic underscor relat import price stabil central bank goal need formul conduct monetari polici preserv price stabil mediumtolong term horizon note earlier recent research stress increas open trade financi interdepend reinforc central bank emphasi object price stabil relat minimis output volatil result also deriv model endogen portfolio choic focus riskshar properti crossbord trade nomin bond moreov environ price stabil persist rapid money growth rise leverag financi liberalis integr could lead accumul financi imbal number year increas probabl boomandbust cycl financi market repercuss price stabil longer term possibl impli monetari polici place increas emphasi preserv price stabil longer time horizon extend beyond medium term regard analyt framework globalis principl affect market structur agent behaviour inflat dynam thus requir close monitor care assess effect econom analysi employ ecb assess shorttomedium term risk price stabil could subject greater paramet model uncertainti well increas measur error associ unobserv variabl potenti output underli assess real activ inflat pressur howev econometr evid euro area yet identifi signific indirect effect reflect structur behaviour influenc globalis inflat dynam nevertheless complex econom analysi increas task becom challeng clear need better understand measur impact globalis period potenti signific structur chang product labour market crosscheck assess risk base econom analysi monetari analysi becom import proposit conceptu correct unfortun influenc financi globalis money credit growth impli practic monetari analysi also becom challeng requir increas sophist necessari reli wide rang analyt tool model order identifi under trend monetari develop assess implic price stabil time alreadi stress environ increas global financi integr deeper broader analysi develop monetari liquid enhanc understand potenti risk financi stabil materialis repercuss output volatil price stabil longer term reason pertin research ecb strengthen includ analysi interact financi globalis innov one hand monetari market liquid potenti implic monetari polici financi stabil reason chang fundament way analyt framework employ assess prospect risk price stabil respons globalis contrari conclud ecb strategi mediumtolong term orient promin assign analysi monetari develop liquid condit crosscheck outcom econom analys well place address implic globalis inflat dynam longterm financi price stabil nevertheless improv understand influenc globalis monetari polici transmiss mechan enhanc analysi under decis bring second last question polici effect monetari polici becom less effect consequ increas financi integr specif associ comov longterm interest rate impair function one channel monetari polici transmiss mechan altern monetari polici gain effect time almost perfect capit mobil float exchang rate line islm paradigm recent stress central bank colleagu inde theoret plausibl argu certain featur globalis influenc vari degre key determin longterm interest rate global riskless real rate interest real risk premium addit expect inflat inflat risk premium may diminish degre forc globalis though success monetari polici across globe certain main factor empir evid euro area well broader sampl oecd countri longterm rate react less chang shortterm rate use global factor seem increas import determin nation real bond yield furthermor comov us german japanes bond yield except high last three year interpret find although littl doubt global forc play import role determin domest longterm interest rate provid suffici convinc evid conclud effect monetari polici control inflat reduc increas signific global factor identifi empir analysi like reflect common trend well similar orient monetari polici success contain inflationari pressur noth prevent nation monetari polici diverg common orient foster increas competit currenc central bank still abl preserv price stabil choos achiev longterm inflat object float exchang rate howev relat import differ channel transmiss effect monetari polici might affect ongo global econom integr underscor import central bank credibl commit object effect consist communic sum effect globalis product labour financi market potenti farreach howev implic monetari polici overal fair contain phenomenon globalis neither call fundament chang monetari polici strategi affect materi way general effect monetari polici globalis impli greater emphasi price stabil object medium longerterm horizon also impli monetari analysi becom challeng time relat import assess longterm risk price stabil financi stabil moreov globalis affect relat signific function channel monetari polici transmiss mechan avail empir evid euro area suggest effect limit far context would favour approach german writer philosoph engin novali mention hypothes like net throw net catch fish clear research essenti need close monitor care analysi empir evid well improv understand influenc globalis monetari polici transmiss mechan help improv qualiti robust analysi under abil continu fulfil mandat maintain price stabil contribut safeguard financi stabil object mind judg programm confer highest expect brilliant start today next two day also signific advanc understand knowledg import issu thank much attent adalid r detken c liquid shock asset price boombust cycl european central bank work paper seri algieri b brack pattern current account adjust insight past experi mimeo ecb barro r j salaimartin x world real interest rate nation bureau econom research macroeconom annual vol bean c monetari polici uncertain world oxonia distinguish speaker seminar oxford institut econom polici oxford februari bean c comment ken rogoff impact global monetari polici feder reserv bank kansa citi th annual econom symposium jackson hole wyom august bean c b globalis inflat speech lse econom societi london school econom octob bem r dedola l current account revers capit market integr adjust us extern posit revisit mimeo ecb bem r dedola l smet f us imbal role technolog polici ecb work paper bernholz p p kugler price revolut th centuri empir result strucutr vectorautoregress model work paper univers basl bini smaghi l global capit nation monetari polici speech european econom financi centr london januari borio c filardo globalis inflat new crosscountri evid global determin domest inflat bis work paper boivin j giannoni m p monetari polici becom effect review econom statist januari nber work paper seri ciccarelli m mojon b global inflat ecb work paper seri dedola l global imbal excess liquid link ecb director general research research bulletin detken c comment bond yield conundrum macrofin perspect monetari econom studi institut monetari econom studi bank japan pp devereux m b sutherland financi global monetari polici discuss paper seri intern macroeconom centr econom polici research engler p fidora m thimann c extern imbal us current account supplysid chang lessen exchang rate adjust mimeo ecb european central bank financi stabil review forthcom june european central bank b month bulletin articl forthcom juli interpret monetari develop sinc mid ferguson r hartmann p panetta f port r intern financi stabil draft report prepar icmb confer geneva may ferrero g nobili passiglia p sector distribut money suppli euro area temi di discussion banca d italia frankel j economist mean global implic inflat monetari polici written academ consult meet board governor feder reserv system fratzscher m juven l sarno l asset price exchang rate current account ecb mimeo march giannon d lenza m reichlin l equilibrium level world real interest rate paper present first annual risk manag institut research confer capit flow asset price intern dimens risk singapor juli gnan e valderama m global inflat monetari polici monetari polici economi greiber c setzer r money hous evid euro area us deutsch bundesbank econom departmenthamilton e american treasur price revolut spain harvard econom studi cambridg harvard univers press ihrig j kamin b lindner d marqu j simpl test global inflat hypothesi intern financ discuss paper board governor feder reserv system intern monetari fund world econom outlook global labor chapter kroszner r global capit market implic inflat yield curv remark center financi stabil cef bueno air argentina may landesberg von j sector money demand model euro area base common set determin ecb work paper munro j pattern trade money credit traci j bradi oberman h ed handbook european histori later middl age renaiss reform leiden e j brill pain n kosk solli m globalis inflat oecd economi econom depart work paper papademo l monetari polici chang world commit strategi credibl speech fourth confer intern research forum monetari polici washington d c decemb pepper g olivi m liquid theori asset price wiley financ rajan r financi develop made world riskier nber work paper rajan r monetari polici incent fernández de lis restoy f central bank st centuri proceed intern confer sponsor banco de españa madrid banco de españa razin binyamini flatten shortrun tradeoff inflat domest activ paper present symposium phillip curv natur rate unemploy kiel institut world economi june reichlin l panel remark thirteenth intern confer financi market real economi low interest rate environ bank japan tokyo rogoff k global global disinfl intern monetari fund paper prepar feder reserv bank kansa citi confer monetari polici uncertainti adapt chang economi jackson hole wy august rogoff k impact global monetari polici harvard univers prepar symposium sponsor feder reserv bank kansa citi new econom geographi effect polici implic jackson hole wyom august romer d open inflat theori evid quarter journal econom smith inquiri natur caus wealth nation edit c j bullock vol x harvard classic new york p f collier son weber challeng pose financi globalis lectur univers pune pune march wu global effect interest rate yield curv econom letter insight feder reserv bank dalla vol yellen j l monetari polici global environ speech euro dollar global economi confer u c santa cruz santa cruz ca may catalonia allow trade america decre charl iii smith estim discoveri abund mine america reduc sixteenth centuri valu gold silver europ third see smith hamilton bernholz kugler navarro one famous scholar school salamanca wrote thing equal countri great scarciti money saleabl good even hand labour men given less money abund see exampl munro inflat bias context refer compon inflat result implement time inconsist polici nomin rigid creat incent policymak reduc unemploy exploit shortrun tradeoff inflat unemploy rogoff see romer similar argument relat open factor lead increas cost inflationari monetari polici due fear capit outflow see exampl bean b frankel razin binyamini would also reduc inflat bias effect bias larger weight inflat object domin flatter phillipscurv model borio filardo gnan valderrama ihrig et al imf bean see also ciccarelli mojon find global factor greater explanatori power determin domest inflat boivin giannoni bean pain et al intern monetari fund see ecb financi stabil review june ecb month bulletin juli forthcom ferrero et al von landesberg ferguson et al horizon net foreign liabil posit euro area increas gdp see exampl descript link m activ asset price pepper ecb month bulletin juli forthcom binismaghi bem dedola algieri brack engler et al fratzscher juven sarno bem dedola smet see dedola discuss hypothesi see ecb financi stabil review june box discuss concept monetari financi liquid rajan adalid detken detken respect link liquid low bond yield greiber setzer razin binyamini devereux see yellen weber wu reichlin giannon lenza reichlin interest alreadi barro salaimartin classic articl found real interest rate seven nine oecd countri investig main depend world factor period ferguson et al see kroszner see papademo reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en