Jean-Claude Trichet: Hearing at the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament,21-06-2010,European Central Bank,ECB,2268,"<p>Dear Madam Chair,Dear Honourable Members,Since our last meeting on 22 March, the euro area has faced one of the most challenging periods since the beginning of Economic and Monetary Union. To address the unprecedented pressures in financial markets, public authorities in the European Union, including the European Central Bank, have taken bold and courageous steps. Die wichtigen Entscheidungen, die in jüngster Zeit getroffen wurden, erfordern fundierte Erklärungen und Antworten auf Fragen, die sicherlich auch in diesem Hohen Hause gestellt werden. Daher begrüße ich die Möglichkeit zum Austausch anläßlich der heutigen Anhörung ganz besonders. Je commencerai donc mon intervention par une évaluation de la situation économique. Je reviendrai ensuite sur la décision annoncée le 10 mai dernier de procéder à des interventions sur les marchés obligataires de la zone euro. Dans une troisième partie, je me pencherai sur les mécanismes de coordination économique de la zone euro et les changements que la situation actuelle appelle. Since the previous hearing in March, incoming data have confirmed a continuing recovery in the euro area in the first half of 2010. According to the latest estimates, the economy grew by 0.2% quarter on quarter in the first three months of this year. Looking ahead, our earlier expectations that the euro area economy would expand at a moderate rate this year and next have been confirmed. The latest projections by Eurosystem staff are broadly in line with this assessment. In our view, the risks to this outlook are broadly balanced. Nevertheless, the recovery is likely to remain uneven over time and across economies and sectors, in an environment of continued uncertainty and with tensions in some segments of the financial markets. The annual rate of inflation in the euro area stood at 1.6% in May, up slightly from 1.5% in April, mostly because of higher energy prices. We may see some further slight increases in inflation in the second half of this year. Looking further ahead, we continue to expect price developments to remain moderate over the policy relevant medium-term horizon. Our monetary analysis confirms that inflationary pressures over the medium term should be well contained. This is reflected in particular in the overall weak growth of money and credit. The annual growth rate of loans to households is continuing to strengthen, but the growth rate of loans to enterprises has remained negative, as expected in the current phase of the cycle. Suggestions that inflation might be unanchored are entirely unfounded. On the contrary, euro area inflation expectations appear to be remarkably well anchored, in line with our definition of price stability. Given the outlook for price stability and the solid anchoring of longer-term inflation expectations, the Governing Council regards our monetary policy stance and the current level of key ECB interest rates as appropriate. In order to cope with tensions on the money markets, the Governing Council has decided to reintroduce some of our previous non-standard measures. In particular, we have gone back to full allotment in 3-month and 6-month operations, so as to facilitate the liquidity planning of banks. And we have reactivated operations that provide liquidity in US dollars, in coordination with the Federal Reserve and a number of other central banks, to prevent possible liquidity tensions. Let me now turn to the Governing Council’s decision to intervene in euro area debt securities markets, announced on 10 May following abrupt and very severe increases in financial market tensions throughout the world, but especially in Europe. Those tensions were spreading to a wide range of financial market segments, including the stock market, the interbank market and the foreign exchange market. It was observed that the epicentre of these tensions lay in European debt markets, in particular those for government debt. Although the composition of the shocks that triggered the intensification of those tensions was different from that observed in October 2008 after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in the United States, this situation was comparable in terms of the suddenness of the change in sentiment and the abruptness of the flight to safety by international investors. Overall volatility in markets increased sharply and liquidity conditions deteriorated significantly, not only in sovereign bond markets, but also to a critical degree in the money markets. Transactions within the interbank market declined rapidly and uncertainty among banks about counterparties’ creditworthiness increased. There was therefore a risk that the normal functioning of markets and the first link in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy between the central bank and credit institutions could become impaired. This would have meant that the ability of banks, which are the primary source of financing in the euro area, to provide credit to the real economy could have been seriously harmed. It is against this background that the ECB announced on 10 May not only the reactivation of previous non-standard measures, as well as the reactivation of the swap agreements with the Federal Reserve, but also its intervention in debt markets with the launch of the Securities Markets Programme. The single reason for acting is that it is crucial for the effective conduct of monetary policy that government bond markets function as properly as possible. The government bond markets are very important for three reasons. First, interest rates on government bonds usually set a floor for the interest rates that firms and banks have to pay when issuing their bonds. In circumstances of highly disrupted bond markets, the short-term interest rates of the central bank would no longer be passed on to households and firms, and thereby to prices, to the appropriate degree. This is what we call the price channel. Second, sharply lower bond prices implied by the much higher interest rates associated with disrupted bond markets would cause significant losses in the portfolios of financial and non-financial sectors; for banks, this would reduce their ability to provide loans to the economy. This is what we call the balance sheet channel. Third, abnormally low liquidity for government bonds would reduce their role as collateral in refinancing operations, thereby also hindering banks’ supply of loans. This is what we call the liquidity channel. The decision to start intervening in bond markets was therefore taken in order to help maintain the appropriate transmission of monetary policy to the real economy in the euro area by addressing the malfunctioning of some segments of the securities markets. As the aim of the programme is not to inject additional liquidity into the banking system, we fully neutralise the bond purchases by means of specific reabsorption operations. As a result, the prevailing level of liquidity and the money market rates are not affected by the programme. In other words, our monetary policy stance is not affected, and there are no inflationary risks related to this programme. Let me emphasise that we took the decision to introduce the Securities Markets Programme fully in line with the provisions of the Treaty, only operating in the secondary markets for government bonds. We also took the decision in complete independence. We were aware of the commitments made by euro area governments prior to that weekend, on the evening of Friday 7 May. In particular, the Governing Council took note of the statement by euro area governments that they “will take all measures needed to meet [their] fiscal targets this year and the years ahead in line with excessive deficit procedures” and of the “precise additional commitments taken by some euro area governments to accelerate fiscal consolidation and ensure the sustainability of their public finances”. (Quotes from statement by euro area Heads of State or Government, Brussels, 7 May 2010)This brings me to the third issue I would like to discuss.You have asked me to speak about enhanced economic coordination and surveillance in the euro area. The ECB believes that a true quantum leap is needed in the framework for surveillance and adjustment of fiscal policies, as well as broader macroeconomic policies concerned with Europe’s competitiveness. “ La solidarité de fait” that Robert Schuman called for 60 years ago is reflected in the degree of economic integration and interdependence already achieved in Monetary Union. But solidarity is a two-way street. The benefits and protection that are derived from membership of Monetary Union bring with them responsibilities and obligations. This is the fundamental contract which forms the basis for our currency. We now have to turn it into a more effective structure for fiscal and macroeconomic surveillance and adjustment. In line with the topics addressed by the task force chaired by European Council President van Rompuy, let me focus here on two main areas of reform. A third area, a crisis management framework, is still to be examined at the level of the task force.First, it is of the essence that the surveillance of budgetary policies be strengthened. I am pleased to note that the European Council confirmed this assessment at its meeting last Thursday. At the level of the EU27, and in particular within the euro area, we must have effective instruments to prevent – and, where necessary, correct – excessive deficits and debt levels. A more stringent implementation of rules and procedures is essential, among other things by increasing the automaticity and speed of procedural steps. The initiation of sanctions also needs to be quasi-automatic. Fiscal surveillance must be more direct and effective. It must also be based on more independent monitoring and assessment. We may need a differentiated approach to surveillance depending on the fiscal performance of countries. The Commission should have greater responsibility by making proposals, which can only be modified with unanimity in the Council, rather than mere recommendations under the Stability and Growth Pact. In the event of non-compliance, sanctions need to be applied much earlier and to be broader in scope. They should not only address excessive debt ratios, but also apply when countries are not making sufficient progress towards medium-term budgetary objectives. A wider spectrum of financial sanctions needs to be considered, along with non-financial and procedural sanctions, such as more stringent reporting requirements or even a limitation or suspension of voting rights. The second area may appear more novel, both at the level of the European Union and at the level of the euro area, but the ECB has in fact been stressing it in the Eurogroup since at least 2005: the surveillance of policies to maintain Europe’s internal and external competitiveness – policies to raise productivity, to enhance people’s skills and to improve firms’ competitiveness. These policies go well beyond the tradable sector. They must also encompass the non-tradable sector, including the public sector, since it too is decisive for the competitiveness of an economy as a whole. Conscious management of wages and costs in order to maintain a healthy position for the economy within a competitive environment – this should be the core focus of such broader macroeconomic surveillance. The reason why competitiveness should be the main focus is not that countries should pursue export-oriented policies or boost international market share. The reason is that within a monetary union, the relative competitiveness of economies captures very well the sustainability of price and cost developments. I am pleased that last Thursday’s European Council confirmed the need for an effective surveillance framework in this area. Experience has shown that persistent divergence in this regard is detrimental both for Member States and for Monetary Union as a whole. As with fiscal surveillance, this framework needs to allow for targeted and differentiated surveillance and follow-up measures. For countries that experience significant losses of competitiveness, surveillance should become increasingly deep and detailed. More ad hoc reporting and dedicated country missions, policy recommendations, compliance requirements, public peer pressure and gradual financial steps to encourage compliance could all be part of that process. For this to work, we need a transparent and effective trigger mechanism to determine the intensity of vulnerabilities and surveillance. This should be based on close monitoring and reporting by both the Commission and the ECB. Experts are currently developing ways to best capture the complexity of the issue, as well as procedures by which indicators could be used in a surveillance and adjustment framework. If we can put in place effective surveillance and adjustment frameworks for both fiscal and competitiveness policies – and if we can ensure through appropriate regulation that our financial system serves the real economy and not the other way around – our European Union and our Economic and Monetary Union will exit this crisis much stronger than before and will be very well placed in the global economy. Honourable Members, Let me conclude by saying that as we steer a course through these difficult times, we must clearly all work hard, but we must also maintain our ambition. This means that decisions need to be proportional to the importance of the Union. A single market of 500 million citizens and an Economic and Monetary Union of 330 million citizens – which are among the largest and most advanced economies in the world and which are built on solid foundations in terms of human and social capital – cannot and should not be measured according to the strengths or weaknesses of their individual components alone. Particularly as regards Economic and Monetary Union, policy-makers need to internalise what it means to be part of a monetary union, in words and in deeds. I therefore very much welcome the calls by this Parliament for ambitious reforms. The reaction of Europe in times of crisis has always been to strengthen European cohesion. I would like to urge you, as Members of the European Parliament, as the representatives of Europe’s citizens, to continue to give your support to that course of action. Thank you for your attention.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",dear madam chair dear honour member sinc last meet march euro area face one challeng period sinc begin econom monetari union address unpreced pressur financi market public author european union includ european central bank taken bold courag step die wichtigen entscheidungen die jüngster zeit getroffen wurden erfordern fundiert erklärungen und antworten auf fragen die sicherlich auch diesem hohen haus gestellt werden daher begrüß ich die möglichkeit zum austausch anläßlich der heutigen anhörung ganz besond je commencerai donc mon intervent par une évaluat de la situat économiqu je reviendrai ensuit sur la décision annoncé le mai dernier de procéder à des intervent sur les marché obligatair de la zone euro dan une troisièm parti je pencherai sur les mécanism de coordin économiqu de la zone euro et les changement que la situat actuell appell sinc previous hear march incom data confirm continu recoveri euro area first half accord latest estim economi grew quarter quarter first three month year look ahead earlier expect euro area economi would expand moder rate year next confirm latest project eurosystem staff broad line assess view risk outlook broad balanc nevertheless recoveri like remain uneven time across economi sector environ continu uncertainti tension segment financi market annual rate inflat euro area stood may slight april most higher energi price may see slight increas inflat second half year look ahead continu expect price develop remain moder polici relev mediumterm horizon monetari analysi confirm inflationari pressur medium term well contain reflect particular overal weak growth money credit annual growth rate loan household continu strengthen growth rate loan enterpris remain negat expect current phase cycl suggest inflat might unanchor entir unfound contrari euro area inflat expect appear remark well anchor line definit price stabil given outlook price stabil solid anchor longerterm inflat expect govern council regard monetari polici stanc current level key ecb interest rate appropri order cope tension money market govern council decid reintroduc previous nonstandard measur particular gone back full allot month month oper facilit liquid plan bank reactiv oper provid liquid us dollar coordin feder reserv number central bank prevent possibl liquid tension let turn govern council decis interven euro area debt secur market announc may follow abrupt sever increas financi market tension throughout world especi europ tension spread wide rang financi market segment includ stock market interbank market foreign exchang market observ epicentr tension lay european debt market particular govern debt although composit shock trigger intensif tension differ observ octob collaps lehman brother unit state situat compar term sudden chang sentiment abrupt flight safeti intern investor overal volatil market increas sharpli liquid condit deterior signific sovereign bond market also critic degre money market transact within interbank market declin rapid uncertainti among bank counterparti creditworthi increas therefor risk normal function market first link transmiss mechan monetari polici central bank credit institut could becom impair would meant abil bank primari sourc financ euro area provid credit real economi could serious harm background ecb announc may reactiv previous nonstandard measur well reactiv swap agreement feder reserv also intervent debt market launch secur market programm singl reason act crucial effect conduct monetari polici govern bond market function proper possibl govern bond market import three reason first interest rate govern bond usual set floor interest rate firm bank pay issu bond circumst high disrupt bond market shortterm interest rate central bank would longer pass household firm therebi price appropri degre call price channel second sharpli lower bond price impli much higher interest rate associ disrupt bond market would caus signific loss portfolio financi nonfinanci sector bank would reduc abil provid loan economi call balanc sheet channel third abnorm low liquid govern bond would reduc role collater refinanc oper therebi also hinder bank suppli loan call liquid channel decis start interven bond market therefor taken order help maintain appropri transmiss monetari polici real economi euro area address malfunct segment secur market aim programm inject addit liquid bank system fulli neutralis bond purchas mean specif reabsorpt oper result prevail level liquid money market rate affect programm word monetari polici stanc affect inflationari risk relat programm let emphasis took decis introduc secur market programm fulli line provis treati oper secondari market govern bond also took decis complet independ awar commit made euro area govern prior weekend even friday may particular govern council took note statement euro area govern take measur need meet fiscal target year year ahead line excess deficit procedur precis addit commit taken euro area govern acceler fiscal consolid ensur sustain public financ quot statement euro area head state govern brussel may bring third issu would like discuss ask speak enhanc econom coordin surveil euro area ecb believ true quantum leap need framework surveil adjust fiscal polici well broader macroeconom polici concern europ competit la solidarité de fait robert schuman call year ago reflect degre econom integr interdepend alreadi achiev monetari union solidar twoway street benefit protect deriv membership monetari union bring respons oblig fundament contract form basi currenc turn effect structur fiscal macroeconom surveil adjust line topic address task forc chair european council presid van rompuy let focus two main area reform third area crisi manag framework still examin level task forc first essenc surveil budgetari polici strengthen pleas note european council confirm assess meet last thursday level eu particular within euro area must effect instrument prevent necessari correct excess deficit debt level stringent implement rule procedur essenti among thing increas automat speed procedur step initi sanction also need quasiautomat fiscal surveil must direct effect must also base independ monitor assess may need differenti approach surveil depend fiscal perform countri commiss greater respons make propos modifi unanim council rather mere recommend stabil growth pact event noncompli sanction need appli much earlier broader scope address excess debt ratio also appli countri make suffici progress toward mediumterm budgetari object wider spectrum financi sanction need consid along nonfinanci procedur sanction stringent report requir even limit suspens vote right second area may appear novel level european union level euro area ecb fact stress eurogroup sinc least surveil polici maintain europ intern extern competit polici rais product enhanc peopl skill improv firm competit polici go well beyond tradabl sector must also encompass nontrad sector includ public sector sinc decis competit economi whole conscious manag wage cost order maintain healthi posit economi within competit environ core focus broader macroeconom surveil reason competit main focus countri pursu exportori polici boost intern market share reason within monetari union relat competit economi captur well sustain price cost develop pleas last thursday european council confirm need effect surveil framework area experi shown persist diverg regard detriment member state monetari union whole fiscal surveil framework need allow target differenti surveil followup measur countri experi signific loss competit surveil becom increas deep detail ad hoc report dedic countri mission polici recommend complianc requir public peer pressur gradual financi step encourag complianc could part process work need transpar effect trigger mechan determin intens vulner surveil base close monitor report commiss ecb expert current develop way best captur complex issu well procedur indic could use surveil adjust framework put place effect surveil adjust framework fiscal competit polici ensur appropri regul financi system serv real economi way around european union econom monetari union exit crisi much stronger well place global economi honour member let conclud say steer cours difficult time must clear work hard must also maintain ambit mean decis need proport import union singl market million citizen econom monetari union million citizen among largest advanc economi world built solid foundat term human social capit cannot measur accord strength weak individu compon alon particular regard econom monetari union policymak need internalis mean part monetari union word deed therefor much welcom call parliament ambiti reform reaction europ time crisi alway strengthen european cohes would like urg member european parliament repres europ citizen continu give support cours action thank attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en