Vítor Constâncio: Financial Stability: Measurement and policy,14-06-2012,European Central Bank,ECB,5706,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen, After a productive day, it is with great pleasure that I welcome you to this dinner. Before we get started, let me offer a few thoughts regarding macro-prudential research, the current stage of financial stability analysis at the ECB and policy conduct in Europe. The sources and the propagation of the financial crisis highlighted the need for putting in place robust policy infrastructures to safeguard financial stability and for macro-prudential policies to address systemic risk. In this light, new institutions have been put in place, such as the European System of Financial Supervision and the Financial Stability Oversight Council in the United States, and regulatory reforms are taking shape, notably Basel III and a host of other initiatives under the leadership of the Financial Stability Board. This progress notwithstanding, it needs to be kept in mind that in the macro-prudential field we are in a much less comfortable position than in the monetary policy field, in particular concerning widely accepted scientific foundations and long experience with tested policy instruments.Against this background, I will start by providing a brief overview of the recent macro-prudential research. I will then focus on some of the main analytical tools for financial stability analysis at the European Central Bank (ECB). I will conclude by referring to a key aspect of our future regulatory framework in Europe, namely the set of macro-prudential policy instruments embedded in the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD) IV, and how these instruments should be made compatible with the requirements for both safeguarding financial stability and further developing the Single Market for financial services.The theoretic foundations in the macro-prudential field are still at a largely rudimentary state compared to other research areas. This notwithstanding, significant advances in macro-prudential research have been made in recent years; in particular fuelled by the lessons learnt during the financial crisis which underscored the need to take a more systemic view to monitoring and assessing risks and vulnerabilities within the financial system and beyond.The papers presented at today and tomorrow’s conference provide some useful snapshots of the recent academic advances in the field of macro-prudential, and more broadly, financial stability analysis.One promising area of research deals with early warning models and systemic risk indicators, which was the theme of Sessions I and II this morning. In recent years the value of early warning indicators has increased thanks to improved methodologies and the use of less exploited data sources. It should also be added that from a policy perspective the focus has been shifted somewhat from predicting crises to predicting growing imbalances and highlighting underlying vulnerabilities. As I believe was also illustrated by Atish Ghosh this morning, this change of focus has most likely contributed to the greater effectiveness of new early warning tools. [1] Recent research shows how the predictive information can be improved by using individual balance sheet data of financial firms combined with traditional macro-financial variables. As for example illustrated by Claudio Borio and co-authors and by Alessi and Detken, the merit of private credit and liquidity gaps and the role of global variables in early warnings has been confirmed, while the performance of bank solvency and liquidity ratios in this regard is still under debate. [2] For what concerns systemic risk indicators, valuable information for policy-makers comes from the measurement of the current level of systemic financial stress. A popular means of assessing the systemic importance of a financial institution is to look at the sensitivity of its value at risk (VaR) - i.e. its tail dependence - to shocks to the whole financial system. This has been proposed by the CoVaR approach of Adrian and Brunnermeier or by similar models of cross-sectional measures, like the Co-Risk used by the IMF and based in CDS premia [3] or the Systemic Expected Shortfall (SES) predicted by the Marginal Expected Shortfall (MES) of an institution and its leverage developed by Acharya and co-authors and by Brownless and Engle. [4] CoVar calculations are being used by the FSOC in the US. We at the ECB use different types of indicators to try to gage systemic risk as I will explain in a moment. A key element of this kind of systemic risk indicators is to account for the network relations and clusters of systemic risk spillovers, as for instance demonstrated by Nikolaus Hautsch and Kay Giesecke in their presentations this morning. [5] Importantly, allowing for interconnectedness may also help improving the predictive power of early warning models. This is clearly illustrated by the ECB presentation this morning by Peltonen et al [6] which shows the usefulness of adding contagion to a regular Early Warning Systems improves the performance of the model proving that it would have been successful in predicting bank distress when the financial crisis was approaching.A second important research area deals precisely with the assessment of contagion risks, which was addressed in Session III. Contagion within the financial system can occur in several ways, as illustrated by Franklin Allen this afternoon. [7] Most commonly, shock propagation within the financial system is thought to occur via interbank networks or via common asset exposures. Depending on the structure of the network, even small shocks to central hubs in the network can result in serious propagation throughout the system. In most cases, during normal times, financial network structures are typically fairly robust to shocks and thus allow for a better diversification of risk. However, this notwithstanding, shocks to particular elements of the network can trigger major contagion within the system. This is a key feature of the so-called “robust yet fragile” complex networks; also alluded to by Doyne Farmer this afternoon. [8]From a broader financial stability perspective, it is however not sufficient to be able to monitor systemic risks and their potential spillover effects within the financial system were they to occur. Financial stability analysis, and macro-prudential policy actions, is as much about assessing the implications of ruptures in the financial system on the wider economy. From this viewpoint, the development of macro-financial models linking financial instability and the performance of the economy is of the essence  The global financial crisis has revealed important deficiencies of the standard macroeconomic models in capturing financial instabilities. Realistic characterisations of such instabilities include bank defaults, financial market illiquidity, extreme events, and related non-linearities. Especially, the modelling of bank defaults within a general equilibrium framework is crucial to allow for a proper characterisation of financial instability. However, none of these elements feature in the macroeconomic models regularly used for forecasting and monetary policy analysis and only recently has more emphasis been given to better developing the role of financial sectors in these models. Another fundamental link which until recently has been missing in macro-financial models is to allow for heterogeneity, and interlinkages, between the agents within the financial sector Against this background, efforts by economists such as Gertler and Kiyotaki to incorporate interbank markets within Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) models are much welcome. [9] Also worth noting is the model by Goodhart, Kashyap et al which includes the presence of a shadow banking system holding securitised assets issued by the traditional banking system that are subject to default. [10] A lot of attention, for example illustrated in the analysis by Adrian-Shin [11], has also been devoted recently to the debt and leverage ratios of financial intermediaries and to their variation over the business cycle. In answering to the question of which financial frictions matter, Adrian, Colla and Shin (2012) [12] point to the importance of including in a model with financial-real feedbacks the pro-cyclical leverage cycle and the co-existence of loans and bonds that tend to be substitutes in a recession even if spreads on both tend to increase. Geanakoplos has shown that variations in leverage have a huge impact on asset prices potentially contributing to economic bubbles and busts. [13] Leverage cycles have only recently started being incorporated in macro-financial models. One prominent example is the model by Brunnermeier and Sannikov which includes time-varying margin requirements set by financial intermediaries and thus exacerbates the impact of asset prices over the business cycle as they trigger “margin spirals” that may cause long-lasting adverse feedback loops between the financial sector and the real economy. [14]A final research area which I would like to highlight concerns the interactions between macro-prudential policies, including financial regulation, and other policies such as monetary policy as well as the impact these policies might have on the financial system and the real economy. Monetary policy impacts in a fundamental way financial stability: it affects asset prices; influences liquidity conditions and has a bearing on risk taking since low short term interest rates lead directly to expectation of profitable exploitation of a steeper yield curve and consequently tend to increase leverage with more risk [15]. As Adrian and Shin (2009) underline what is significant in this “risk-taking channel” (Borio and Zhu (2008) [16]) is that the short term interest rate has a direct effect on monetary and financial conditions not waiting for the indirect effect on medium term rates.On the other hand, looking to historical experiences with macro-prudential tools, being dynamic provisions in Spain or loan-to-Value ratios in Korea, or to the implications of different models, one conclusion we can draw is that those instruments are not sufficiently strong to tame the financial cycle. One interesting aspect of the model by Goodhart, Kashyap et al  (2012) , that I already quoted, is precisely that its simulations show that none of the analysed instruments (dynamic provisions, loan-to-value ratios, capital requirements, liquidity coverage ratios and margin requirements on repos used by shadow banks), would not be enough, even combining some of them, to smooth the financial cycle. The difficulty comes from the fact that the boom brings large increases in asset prices and this provides a misplaced sense of wealth improvements and a temptation to further leveraging. In this context, they nevertheless conclude that dynamic provisioning and liquidity requirements can be the more effective tools but still insufficient as the Spanish experience shows. Banks became more resilient but the bubble was not prevented. All these points indicate that there must be a role for monetary policy to address financial stability considerations even when the priority target of monetary policy is price stability as this goal is affected in the medium term by financial instability. Traditionally monetary policy is only concerned about price stability, particularly in the inflation targeting regime, even if central banking has since the XIX century cared for financial stability in the form of lender-of-last-resort for banks in times of liquidity distress. This asymmetric policy of only “mopping-up” with liquidity in financial market downturns but ignoring the risks of the upside booms creates moral hazard and provides a significant “liquidity subsidy” to the financial sector. The arguments against doing otherwise have been centred in the difficulty of “identifying bubbles” or in the danger of “pricking bubbles”. Nevertheless the on-going debate is not anymore about “pricking bubbles” but concerns the inclusion of financial conditions in the optimal monetary rules as in the models developed by Christiano, Motto, Rostagno (2009), Curdia and Woodford (2010) or Gertler and Karadi (2011)). [17] The new models are nevertheless not mature enough and do not include all relevant financial frictions. A pure “leaning against the wind” policy is possible but has limitations although, in any case, monetary policy should become less asymmetric and complement the indispensable regulatory and macro-prudential policies. While these reflections only provided a snapshot of the plethora of research currently being undertaken in the field of financial stability analysis, in my view these are some of the key elements. It also broadly reflects our own efforts here at the ECB to further develop and implement an appropriate financial stability analytical toolkit. This is the topic to which I now turn. Beyond the academic research, a lot more analytical macro-prudential work is undertaken here at the ECB, as it’s the case at other central banks. Our main aim with this work is to be in a position to carry out systemic risk assessments in real time, directly and regularly supporting policy discussions. For this purpose, we have at our disposal a number of tools and techniques to help us form a comprehensive view of prevailing systemic risks and to help assessing and quantifying the impact of these risks, were they to materialise, on the banking sector and ultimately on the real economy. More concretely, we structure our financial stability analysis in the usual way with three broad elements. The first entails an  identification of important sources of system-wide vulnerabilities based on an analysis of the individual and collective strength of the different parts of the financial system – institutions, markets and infrastructures. The second is an  assessment of the potential costs – to the real economy – should some combination of the identified risks and vulnerabilities materialise. A proper indicator of systemic risk should entail both of these properties, the probability of an adverse event occurring and the potential impact of such an event occurring. A last element is methodologies examining  network fragilities and  contagion.Starting with the identification of potential sources of systemic risk, our analysis focuses on two broad types of indicators:The first set of indicators characterise the current state of financial stress in the financial system, i.e. indicators that works as ‘thermometers’ of the level of tension in the financial system. As crises tend to exhibit many different manifestations, it is obvious that no single metric can gauge the current level of systemic stress. In practice, we cross-check and report on a variety of complementary indicators. Let me mention a few examples. One class of approaches employed in practice here at the ECB can be classified as ‘ market based indicators’ – that is, with a focus on signals from both financial markets and financial institutions. At least four examples of distinct indicators in this category can be mentioned. First, general financial market stress is quite accurately captured by the so-called coincident indicator of systemic stress, or “CISS”, which succinctly synthesises the interaction of stress across key market segments also taking into account explicitly the correlation structure of different segments. [18] A second indicator in this class of measures focuses specifically on systemic stress within the banking sector – examining the onset of systemic stress through the lens of joint probabilities of default on the basis of CDS pricing of financial institutions. [19] A third group of market based indicators focus squarely on liquidity conditions – either in specific market segments (e.g. the money market) or across financial market segments. [20] Lastly, novel methods such as self-organising financial stability maps provide an alternative means of gauging systemic stress through visual means – thereby providing a useful complement to numerical signalling methodologies. [21] Another separate class of indicators we regularly report characterising the current state of financial stability can be classified as ‘ structural indicators’ – that is, examining potentially excessive leverage and credit developments – as well as disequilibria in specific asset price segments in specific economies or sectors. Examples of indicators in this category are numerous, but clearly encompass models of credit booms as well as various estimates of valuation in real estate markets. [22] Both such sets of indicators can provide indications of buildup of imbalances but suffer from one drawback. Assumptions need to be made about what defines excessive developments. These assumptions, accordingly, must be robust as otherwise they risk being challenged by addressees of policy recommendations. The second set of indicators more explicitly strives to  predict vulnerable states of the financial system, i.e. early warning indicators – be in in the form of univariate indicators, multivariate models or early warning  systems. The key feature of all the categories of early warning indicators is that their signals are evaluated in an early warning framework, thus historically measuring the performance in terms of correctness and timeliness of the signals, potentially taking into account the relative preferences of the policy maker between type 1 and type 2 errors. This is an active field at the ECB – a representative example in this respect would be the work of Alessi and Detken arguing that the global credit gap is the most robust early warning indicator for costly aggregate asset price booms or the work of Lo Duca and Peltonen building on systemic risks stemming from a combination of domestic and global macrofinancial vulnerabilities. [23]Of course, the triggers and exact timings of crises are extremely difficult to predict. However, the underlying vulnerabilities, at least based on past experiences, seem often to be detectable - one needs to at least control for “known knowns” or “known unknowns”. Indeed, many crises follow a very similar pattern featuring excessive leverage. Accordingly, the fact that early warning seems possible has practically become part of the layman’s lexicon – not least given widespread even popular appeal of analyses on historical crises (e.g. Reinhart-Rogoff). Despite these strides, much remains to be done until policymakers can be fully confident enough to implement and make use of robust early warning systems. Let me move to the assessment tools. One of the major tools to perform financial stability assessments is stress testing, primarily of the banking sector, but also conducted for the insurance sector – including sensitivity and scenario analyses. Stress testing tools allow for evaluating the impact on banking sector solvency of severe, but plausible macro-financial scenarios that reflect key systemic risks. On this basis, we use our (top-down) stress test tools to rank the impact of prevalent macro-financial risks in order to gauge the resilience of the banking sector.The top-down, or macro-prudential, stress-testing framework developed by the ECB has proven particularly valuable during the financial crisis and the euro area sovereign debt crisis. Systemic risks emerged, intensified and evolved rapidly, calling for a flexible and operational tool that could deliver quantified impact assessments in a timely fashion. The tool is comprehensive enough to cover individual banks and it incorporates real-financial interactions as well as network models to assess contagion risk.These features notwithstanding, and despite its increasing prominence in financial stability analysis and communication, stress testing has its limits. Notably, even state-of-the-art stress testing frameworks are characterised by substantial methodological limitations.The major challenges facing stress testers today range from dealing with the inevitable subjectivity related to scenario building, how to model and integrate in a consistent way within the framework elements, such as endogenous bank responses, interbank spillover and macroeconomic feedback effects. Many of the available models also have difficulties capturing well the often non-linear tail risk effects that the scenarios are typically meant to reflect. Finally, stress test results are only as good as the data available, which in particular for central banks and other macro-prudential authorities without supervisory access is a key deficiency.Finally, let me add that even though our top-down stress testing framework is far from perfect and suffer from many deficiencies, it has proved a useful tool to challenge the more granular bottom-up approaches, such as the EBA EU-wide stress tests, and especially to detect outlier responses by individual banks in the latter case.The last broad element of ECB financial stability analysis is the rapidly burgeoning literature on contagion. I reviewed some ECB work in this area in a speech last October. [24] In that speech, I mentioned several analytical perspectives we use to examine contagion in all its forms relevant for the ongoing sovereign crisis in the euro area – highlighting models capturing the interaction between sovereigns, as well as that between sovereigns and banks. Such models make use of multiple techniques to uncover contagion – namely, multivariate frequency decompositions, regime-switching approaches and exploiting generalised measures of risk aversion in entity-specific frameworks. Clearly, the issue of contagion is not distinct from that of network analysis. While work in this area is broad, I can point to some recent ECB work featured in our latest Financial Stability Review – in which tools and results are presented regarding applications of network analysis both for actual collateral holdings and simulated interbank networks. [25] Ultimately, work in this field remains still relatively nascent and I am sure more highly relevant applications will follow with time. Let me now turn to the design of a macro-prudential policy framework and the definition of a policy toolkit that is expected to be available for authorities to address the identified systemic risks in Europe.Since the outbreak of the financial crisis, policy makers have gradually placed more and more emphasis on a macro-prudential approach of financial regulation. The first step in this process was the establishment of the Financial Stability Board as a global coordinating body which was followed by setting up authorities with explicit macro-prudential mandates at the national level as well. An important milestone in this process was the establishment of the ESRB in Europe last year. Besides its role in facilitating discussion on macro-prudential mandates and institutional set-up at the national level, the ESRB plays a key role in developing a toolkit of macro-prudential policy instruments that national authorities can use within the European legal framework.In this context, a major policy challenge Europe is currently facing is the implementation of the Basel III standards in a way that would allow authorities to use policy tools for macro-prudential purposes as well. I would like to highlight in this regard that Basel III already includes some elements of a specific macro-prudential toolkit, such as the counter-cyclical capital buffer, which requires banks to build up capital buffers in periods of excessive credit growth. These buffers can then be released in stress situations, which would help institutions to avoid becoming constrained by regulatory requirements and may thus enhance their ability to maintain lending activity.However, when having a closer look at the Basel III agreement, we have to acknowledge that most elements of the new framework are traditionally considered as micro-prudential in nature. The capital and liquidity rules are designed so as to address risks at the level of individual institutions. Still, depending on how these instruments are calibrated, they could, in principle, be also used to address macro-prudential concerns and mitigate systemic risks. This is a topical issue from a policy perspective in Europe, given that discussions are at their final phase on the implementation of Basel III through the so called “CRD IV”, which includes a proposal for a directive and a regulation. Importantly, the regulation will introduce a new feature in financial regulation, namely that the prudential standards laid down in this legislative proposal will be directly applicable in all EU member states.You may already be aware of the concerns that have recently been raised by some authorities and member states with regard to their ability to use the policy tools falling under the regulation for macro-prudential purposes. Concretely, they claim that, if capital and liquidity rules and other micro-prudential instruments are introduced as elements of a “single rulebook”, this would imply a “maximum harmonisation” of prudential requirements. Consequently, member states may be legally prevented from adopting more stringent rules, even if systemic risks would justify that.I share these concerns. However, I would also like to highlight some issues that I consider as a prerequisite for the conduct of efficient macro-prudential policy in a single market.First, as regards the “single rulebook”, the ECB has expressed on many occasions its support towards this approach. We have underlined that the “single rulebook” contributes to a consistent implementation of prudential measures in the Single Market, improves transparency and ensures a level playing field for financial institutions. By avoiding regulatory arbitrage and distortions to competition, the “single rulebook” is also beneficial from the perspective of financial integration in Europe.At the same time, however, let me also underline significant risks to financial stability can emerge when systemic risks identified at the national level may impact other jurisdictions through spillover effects and common exposures of financial institutions. It is therefore of paramount importance that national authorities have the possibility to impose, in a well identified subset of instruments, more stringent rules than those defined by the regulation. Given that member states may well be at different stages of the economic and financial cycle within Europe, and there are also significant differences in the structural features of the financial sector across EU countries, authorities should have the control over an appropriate set of tools to address both the cross-sectional and the time dimension of systemic risks as well.In my view, the appropriate macro-prudential regime in a single market should have three main features:First, adjustments in the prudential rules for the identified subset of instruments should only be possible in the direction of strengthening the harmonised minima. These instruments could include capital and liquidity ratios, leverage and limits to large exposures (Loan-to-Value or Debt-to Income ratios are not limited by the CRD IV). Second, only calibrations should be subject to upward adjustment, while definitions should remain intact so as to ensure that ratios are comparable across institutions and countries, thus respecting the principle of a single EU rulebook. Third, this macro-prudential regime should be subject to strict safeguards, under the ex-ante coordination of the ESRB in order to avoid, or at least to minimise, possible unintended consequences and spillover effects. These safeguards should include the identification and assessment of the macro-prudential concerns in the respective countries both by national authorities and the ESRB, in particular when spillover effects are expected. Furthermore, the implementation of macro-prudential measures should be subject to close monitoring and regular evaluation by the ESRB as well as to disclosure requirements. I’m of the view that if these principles are respected, we can set up a framework that would enable us to mitigate the build-up of excessive risks in the financial system and to contribute to the smooth functioning of the financial system and the Single Market in Europe.Against this backdrop, let me finally say a few words about the recent developments in this field in Europe.First, after months of extensive discussion in European bodies and forums, a compromise has been reached at the European Parliament on 14 May and at the last ECOFIN meeting on 15 May on CRD IV. This is a very important development and I look forward to successful trialogues between the Council, the Parliament and the Commission. Rapid progress and agreement on clear rules of the game are crucial also with a view to meeting the G20 commitments on the timely and comprehensive implementation of Basel III.Third, as regard the proposed regulation as approved by the Council, the compromise text now includes elements that would allow national authorities to apply measures falling under the “single rulebook” for macro-prudential purposes. Overall, this is a welcome development. My critical remark in this regard is that the text of the regulation should state clearly that only the calibrations or quantitative limits can be tightened while definitions should remain intact, since this is the only way to ensure direct comparability or prudential ratios across the EU. I also think that the list of measures was enlarged too much and, for instance, in this context I do not agree with the proposal that the risk weights of certain exposures can be changed as this would distort comparability of such ratios across member states.Let me conclude by saying that finding the right balance between the principle of a “single rulebook” and the required flexibility to implement macro-prudential measures at the national level is and remains a key policy challenge for decision makers in Europe. However, looking at the developments in financial markets and the recent policy initiatives in this field, I’m convinced that the establishment of an efficient and well-functioning macro-prudential framework may substantially contribute to the smooth functioning of the single market and the strengthening of the financial stability framework. The latter would be particularly beneficial for the euro area where the risks to financial stability can be transmitted even faster than elsewhere and a lack of trust in part of the financial system can be felt across the entire currency area. Safeguarding financial stability in the euro area demands a euro area-wide perspective where an effective macro-prudential framework - on the preventative side - is accompanied by a well-functioning resolution mechanism – on the crisis management side. In that respect, as you know, the ECB supports the establishment of a financial union for the euro area, based on three elements: a European deposit insurance scheme, a European Resolution Fund and a euro area banking supervisory authority. Very briefly, this would entail: first, a single deposit insurance scheme that applies to all banks of the euro area so as to avoid unfair completion; second, that a subset of euro area financial institutions that are systemically important or operating significantly cross-border would be subject to a European Resolution Fund; and third, that the same subset of systemically important financial institutions would be subject to a euro area banking supervisory authority. The Resolution Fund would be only for institutions at the point of non-viability that need to be resolved and not for bailouts of “going concerns” so as to minimize the need for public funds. The possible moral hazard risks of having a single deposit guarantee to all banks without many of them being subject to European supervision would have to be addressed, for instance, by imposing that after the need for paying insurance the country where that would have happened would have to contribute at least with 50% of the replenishment of the fund.Besides contributing to a clear commitment to the future of the euro project one key benefit of all these arrangements would be to ensure that the euro area banking and financial system can be separated from the financial situation of the sovereigns. With this a major step would be accomplished to overcome the present European crisis by consolidating in a concrete way the future of our monetary union.[1]See IMF (2010) “The IMF-FSB Early Warning Exercise: Design and Methodologies Toolkit”, September.[2]See e.g. Borio, C. and P. Lowe (2002), “Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: Exploring the nexus”, BIS Working Paper No. 114; Borio, C. and M. Drehmann (2011), “Towards an operational framework for financial stability: ‘fuzzy’ measurement and its consequences”, BIS Working Paper No. 284.; Alessi, L. and C. Detken (2009), “Real-time early warning indicators for costly asset price boom/bust cycles”, ECB Working Paper No. 1039.[3] IMF (2009) “Assessing the systemic implications of financial linkages” Global Financial Stability Report, April 2009, pages 73-110.[4]See, for instance, Adrian, T. and M. Brunnermeier, “CoVaR” (2008), Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No 348, September; Acharya, V.V., L.H. Pedersen, T. Philippon and M. Richardson (2010), “Measuring Systemic Risk”, New York University Working Paper; Brownlees, C.T. and R.F. Engle (2010), “Volatility, Correlation and Tails for Systemic Risk Measurement”, New York University Working Paper.[5]See Hautsch, N., J. Schaumberg and M. Schienle (2012), „Financial network systemic risk contributions”, working paper.[6]See Betz, F., Oprica, S. , Peltonen, T.A.,Sarlin,P (2012) “Predicting bank distress and identifying interdependencies among European Banks”, mimeo[7]See Allen, F., A. Babus and E. Carletti (2012), “Asset commonality, debt maturity and systemic risk”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 104, pp. 519-534.[8]See Caccioli, F., J.D. Farmer, N. Foti and D. Rockmore (2012), “Stability of the Austrian banking system”, unpublished paper.[9]See Gertler, M. and N. Kiyotaki (2010), “Financial intermediation and credit policy in business cycle analysis”, in B. Friedman and M. Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, Edition 1, Volume 3, October. [10]See Goodhart, C.A.E., A. Kashyap, D.P. Tsomocos, and A.P. Vardoulakis (2012), “Financial Regulation in General Equilibrium”, NBER Working Paper No. 17909.[11]See Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin (2010), “Financial intermediaries and monetary economics”, in B. Friedman and M. Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, Edition 1, Volume 3, October.[12]Adrian, T., Colla, P. and Shin, H. S. (2012) “Which financial frictions? Parsing the evidence from the financial crisis of 2007-09” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Reports, revised version March 2012[13]See Geanakoplos, J. (2009), “The leverage cycle”, in D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoff and M. Woodford (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 24.[14]See Brunnermeier, M. and N. Sannikov (2012), “A macroeconomic model with a financial sector”, Working paper.[15] See Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin (2010), “Financial intermediaries and monetary economics”, in B. Friedman and M. Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, Edition 1, Volume 3, October.; Maddaloni, A. and Peydro , J.-L. (2010), ‘Bank risk-taking, securitization, supervision and low interest rates: evidence from US and Euro area lending standards’, Review of Financial Studies, [ECB WP link below] http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp1248.pdf ; Jimenez, G., Ongena, S., Peydro, J.-L. and Saurina, J. (2012), ‘Credit Supply and Monetary Policy: Identifying the Bank Balance-Sheet Channel with Loan Applications’, American Economic Review, [WP link below] http://www.tilburguniversity.edu/webwijs/files/center/ongena/preprints/jopscc.pdf[16] See Borio, C., Zhu, H. “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: a missing link in the transmission mechanism?”BIS WP n. 268, December.[17]See Christiano, L, Motto, R., and Rostagno , M (2010) Financial factors in economic fluctuations”ECB WP n. 1192; Cúrdia, V. and M. Woodford (2010) “Credit spreads and monetary policy” Journal of Money Credit and Banking,  42 (6, Supp.); Gertler, M. and P. Karadi (2010) “A model of unconventional Monetary Policy”, mimeo.[18] See Holló D, M Kremer and M Lo Duca (2012), “CISS - a composite indicator of systemic stress in the financial system”, ECB Working Paper No 1426 (March).[19]See, for instance Box 8 in the June 2012 ECB Financial Stability Review, “Systemic Risk Measure – A portfolio probabilistic perspective on measuring default risk”.[20]See regime-switching methodology in Box 4 of the June 2012 Financial Stability Review, “Addressing stress in interbank markets and the role of unconventional monetary policy measures“ and general liquidity indicator in Box 9 in ECB, Financial Stability Review, June 2007, “Understanding financial market liquidity”.[21]See P. Sarlin and T.A. Peltonen, “Mapping the state of financial stability”, ECB Working Paper Series, No 1382, 2011.[22]On credit, see for instance Schwaab B, S Koopman and A Lucas (2011), “Systemic risk diagnostics: coincident indicators and early warning signals” ECB Working Paper No 1327 (April); for commercial property prices, see Box 6 in the December 2011 ECB Financial Stability Review or for residential property prices, see Box 3 in ECB, Financial Stability Review, June 2011.[23]See Lo Duca M and T Peltonen (2011), “Macro-financial vulnerabilities and future financial stress: assessing systemic risks and predicting systemic events”, ECB Working Paper No 1311 (March).[24]See “Contagion and the European debt crisis”, Keynote lecture by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB at the Bocconi University/Intesa Sanpaolo conference on “Bank Competitiveness in the Post-crisis World” Milan, 10 October 2011.[25]See Special Feature C of the June 2012 ECB Financial Stability Review, “Evaluating interconnectedness in the financial system on the basis of actual and simulated networks”.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen product day great pleasur welcom dinner get start let offer thought regard macroprudenti research current stage financi stabil analysi ecb polici conduct europ sourc propag financi crisi highlight need put place robust polici infrastructur safeguard financi stabil macroprudenti polici address system risk light new institut put place european system financi supervis financi stabil oversight council unit state regulatori reform take shape notabl basel iii host initi leadership financi stabil board progress notwithstand need kept mind macroprudenti field much less comfort posit monetari polici field particular concern wide accept scientif foundat long experi test polici instrument background start provid brief overview recent macroprudenti research focus main analyt tool financi stabil analysi european central bank ecb conclud refer key aspect futur regulatori framework europ name set macroprudenti polici instrument embed capit requir direct crd iv instrument made compat requir safeguard financi stabil develop singl market financi servic theoret foundat macroprudenti field still larg rudimentari state compar research area notwithstand signific advanc macroprudenti research made recent year particular fuell lesson learnt financi crisi underscor need take system view monitor assess risk vulner within financi system beyond paper present today tomorrow confer provid use snapshot recent academ advanc field macroprudenti broad financi stabil analysi one promis area research deal earli warn model system risk indic theme session ii morn recent year valu earli warn indic increas thank improv methodolog use less exploit data sourc also ad polici perspect focus shift somewhat predict crise predict grow imbal highlight under vulner believ also illustr atish ghosh morn chang focus like contribut greater effect new earli warn tool recent research show predict inform improv use individu balanc sheet data financi firm combin tradit macrofinanci variabl exampl illustr claudio borio coauthor alessi detken merit privat credit liquid gap role global variabl earli warn confirm perform bank solvenc liquid ratio regard still debat concern system risk indic valuabl inform policymak come measur current level system financi stress popular mean assess system import financi institut look sensit valu risk var e tail depend shock whole financi system propos covar approach adrian brunnermei similar model crosssect measur like corisk use imf base cds premia system expect shortfal ses predict margin expect shortfal mes institut leverag develop acharya coauthor brownless engl covar calcul use fsoc us ecb use differ type indic tri gage system risk explain moment key element kind system risk indic account network relat cluster system risk spillov instanc demonstr nikolaus hautsch kay gieseck present morn import allow interconnected may also help improv predict power earli warn model clear illustr ecb present morn peltonen et al show use ad contagion regular earli warn system improv perform model prove would success predict bank distress financi crisi approach second import research area deal precis assess contagion risk address session iii contagion within financi system occur sever way illustr franklin allen afternoon common shock propag within financi system thought occur via interbank network via common asset exposur depend structur network even small shock central hub network result serious propag throughout system case normal time financi network structur typic fair robust shock thus allow better diversif risk howev notwithstand shock particular element network trigger major contagion within system key featur socal robust yet fragil complex network also allud doyn farmer afternoon broader financi stabil perspect howev suffici abl monitor system risk potenti spillov effect within financi system occur financi stabil analysi macroprudenti polici action much assess implic ruptur financi system wider economi viewpoint develop macrofinanci model link financi instabl perform economi essenc global financi crisi reveal import defici standard macroeconom model captur financi instabl realist characteris instabl includ bank default financi market illiquid extrem event relat nonlinear especi model bank default within general equilibrium framework crucial allow proper characteris financi instabl howev none element featur macroeconom model regular use forecast monetari polici analysi recent emphasi given better develop role financi sector model anoth fundament link recent miss macrofinanci model allow heterogen interlinkag agent within financi sector background effort economist gertler kiyotaki incorpor interbank market within dynam stochast general equilibrium dsge model much welcom also worth note model goodhart kashyap et al includ presenc shadow bank system hold securitis asset issu tradit bank system subject default lot attent exampl illustr analysi adrianshin also devot recent debt leverag ratio financi intermediari variat busi cycl answer question financi friction matter adrian colla shin point import includ model financialr feedback procycl leverag cycl coexist loan bond tend substitut recess even spread tend increas geanakoplo shown variat leverag huge impact asset price potenti contribut econom bubbl bust leverag cycl recent start incorpor macrofinanci model one promin exampl model brunnermei sannikov includ timevari margin requir set financi intermediari thus exacerb impact asset price busi cycl trigger margin spiral may caus longlast advers feedback loop financi sector real economi final research area would like highlight concern interact macroprudenti polici includ financi regul polici monetari polici well impact polici might financi system real economi monetari polici impact fundament way financi stabil affect asset price influenc liquid condit bear risk take sinc low short term interest rate lead direct expect profit exploit steeper yield curv consequ tend increas leverag risk adrian shin underlin signific risktak channel borio zhu short term interest rate direct effect monetari financi condit wait indirect effect medium term rate hand look histor experi macroprudenti tool dynam provis spain loantovalu ratio korea implic differ model one conclus draw instrument suffici strong tame financi cycl one interest aspect model goodhart kashyap et al alreadi quot precis simul show none analys instrument dynam provis loantovalu ratio capit requir liquid coverag ratio margin requir repo use shadow bank would enough even combin smooth financi cycl difficulti come fact boom bring larg increas asset price provid misplac sens wealth improv temptat leverag context nevertheless conclud dynam provis liquid requir effect tool still insuffici spanish experi show bank becam resili bubbl prevent point indic must role monetari polici address financi stabil consider even prioriti target monetari polici price stabil goal affect medium term financi instabl tradit monetari polici concern price stabil particular inflat target regim even central bank sinc xix centuri care financi stabil form lenderoflastresort bank time liquid distress asymmetr polici moppingup liquid financi market downturn ignor risk upsid boom creat moral hazard provid signific liquid subsidi financi sector argument otherwis centr difficulti identifi bubbl danger prick bubbl nevertheless ongo debat anymor prick bubbl concern inclus financi condit optim monetari rule model develop christiano motto rostagno curdia woodford gertler karadi new model nevertheless matur enough includ relev financi friction pure lean wind polici possibl limit although case monetari polici becom less asymmetr complement indispens regulatori macroprudenti polici reflect provid snapshot plethora research current undertaken field financi stabil analysi view key element also broad reflect effort ecb develop implement appropri financi stabil analyt toolkit topic turn beyond academ research lot analyt macroprudenti work undertaken ecb case central bank main aim work posit carri system risk assess real time direct regular support polici discuss purpos dispos number tool techniqu help us form comprehens view prevail system risk help assess quantifi impact risk materialis bank sector ultim real economi concret structur financi stabil analysi usual way three broad element first entail identif import sourc systemwid vulner base analysi individu collect strength differ part financi system institut market infrastructur second assess potenti cost real economi combin identifi risk vulner materialis proper indic system risk entail properti probabl advers event occur potenti impact event occur last element methodolog examin network fragil contagion start identif potenti sourc system risk analysi focus two broad type indic first set indic characteris current state financi stress financi system e indic work thermomet level tension financi system crise tend exhibit mani differ manifest obvious singl metric gaug current level system stress practic crosscheck report varieti complementari indic let mention exampl one class approach employ practic ecb classifi market base indic focus signal financi market financi institut least four exampl distinct indic categori mention first general financi market stress quit accur captur socal coincid indic system stress ciss succinct synthesis interact stress across key market segment also take account explicit correl structur differ segment second indic class measur focus specif system stress within bank sector examin onset system stress len joint probabl default basi cds price financi institut third group market base indic focus squar liquid condit either specif market segment e g money market across financi market segment last novel method selforganis financi stabil map provid altern mean gaug system stress visual mean therebi provid use complement numer signal methodolog anoth separ class indic regular report characteris current state financi stabil classifi structur indic examin potenti excess leverag credit develop well disequilibria specif asset price segment specif economi sector exampl indic categori numer clear encompass model credit boom well various estim valuat real estat market set indic provid indic buildup imbal suffer one drawback assumpt need made defin excess develop assumpt accord must robust otherwis risk challeng addresse polici recommend second set indic explicit strive predict vulner state financi system e earli warn indic form univari indic multivari model earli warn system key featur categori earli warn indic signal evalu earli warn framework thus histor measur perform term correct timeli signal potenti take account relat prefer polici maker type type error activ field ecb repres exampl respect would work alessi detken argu global credit gap robust earli warn indic cost aggreg asset price boom work lo duca peltonen build system risk stem combin domest global macrofinanci vulner cours trigger exact time crise extrem difficult predict howev under vulner least base past experi seem often detect one need least control known known known unknown inde mani crise follow similar pattern featur excess leverag accord fact earli warn seem possibl practic becom part layman lexicon least given widespread even popular appeal analys histor crise e g reinhartrogoff despit stride much remain done policymak fulli confid enough implement make use robust earli warn system let move assess tool one major tool perform financi stabil assess stress test primarili bank sector also conduct insur sector includ sensit scenario analys stress test tool allow evalu impact bank sector solvenc sever plausibl macrofinanci scenario reflect key system risk basi use topdown stress test tool rank impact preval macrofinanci risk order gaug resili bank sector topdown macroprudenti stresstest framework develop ecb proven particular valuabl financi crisi euro area sovereign debt crisi system risk emerg intensifi evolv rapid call flexibl oper tool could deliv quantifi impact assess time fashion tool comprehens enough cover individu bank incorpor realfinanci interact well network model assess contagion risk featur notwithstand despit increas promin financi stabil analysi communic stress test limit notabl even stateoftheart stress test framework characteris substanti methodolog limit major challeng face stress tester today rang deal inevit subject relat scenario build model integr consist way within framework element endogen bank respons interbank spillov macroeconom feedback effect mani avail model also difficulti captur well often nonlinear tail risk effect scenario typic meant reflect final stress test result good data avail particular central bank macroprudenti author without supervisori access key defici final let add even though topdown stress test framework far perfect suffer mani defici prove use tool challeng granular bottomup approach eba euwid stress test especi detect outlier respons individu bank latter case last broad element ecb financi stabil analysi rapid burgeon literatur contagion review ecb work area speech last octob speech mention sever analyt perspect use examin contagion form relev ongo sovereign crisi euro area highlight model captur interact sovereign well sovereign bank model make use multipl techniqu uncov contagion name multivari frequenc decomposit regimeswitch approach exploit generalis measur risk avers entityspecif framework clear issu contagion distinct network analysi work area broad point recent ecb work featur latest financi stabil review tool result present regard applic network analysi actual collater hold simul interbank network ultim work field remain still relat nascent sure high relev applic follow time let turn design macroprudenti polici framework definit polici toolkit expect avail author address identifi system risk europ sinc outbreak financi crisi polici maker gradual place emphasi macroprudenti approach financi regul first step process establish financi stabil board global coordin bodi follow set author explicit macroprudenti mandat nation level well import mileston process establish esrb europ last year besid role facilit discuss macroprudenti mandat institut setup nation level esrb play key role develop toolkit macroprudenti polici instrument nation author use within european legal framework context major polici challeng europ current face implement basel iii standard way would allow author use polici tool macroprudenti purpos well would like highlight regard basel iii alreadi includ element specif macroprudenti toolkit countercycl capit buffer requir bank build capit buffer period excess credit growth buffer releas stress situat would help institut avoid becom constrain regulatori requir may thus enhanc abil maintain lend activ howev closer look basel iii agreement acknowledg element new framework tradit consid microprudenti natur capit liquid rule design address risk level individu institut still depend instrument calibr could principl also use address macroprudenti concern mitig system risk topic issu polici perspect europ given discuss final phase implement basel iii call crd iv includ propos direct regul import regul introduc new featur financi regul name prudenti standard laid legisl propos direct applic eu member state may alreadi awar concern recent rais author member state regard abil use polici tool fall regul macroprudenti purpos concret claim capit liquid rule microprudenti instrument introduc element singl rulebook would impli maximum harmonis prudenti requir consequ member state may legal prevent adopt stringent rule even system risk would justifi share concern howev would also like highlight issu consid prerequisit conduct effici macroprudenti polici singl market first regard singl rulebook ecb express mani occas support toward approach underlin singl rulebook contribut consist implement prudenti measur singl market improv transpar ensur level play field financi institut avoid regulatori arbitrag distort competit singl rulebook also benefici perspect financi integr europ time howev let also underlin signific risk financi stabil emerg system risk identifi nation level may impact jurisdict spillov effect common exposur financi institut therefor paramount import nation author possibl impos well identifi subset instrument stringent rule defin regul given member state may well differ stage econom financi cycl within europ also signific differ structur featur financi sector across eu countri author control appropri set tool address crosssect time dimens system risk well view appropri macroprudenti regim singl market three main featur first adjust prudenti rule identifi subset instrument possibl direct strengthen harmonis minima instrument could includ capit liquid ratio leverag limit larg exposur loantovalu debtto incom ratio limit crd iv second calibr subject upward adjust definit remain intact ensur ratio compar across institut countri thus respect principl singl eu rulebook third macroprudenti regim subject strict safeguard exant coordin esrb order avoid least minimis possibl unintend consequ spillov effect safeguard includ identif assess macroprudenti concern respect countri nation author esrb particular spillov effect expect furthermor implement macroprudenti measur subject close monitor regular evalu esrb well disclosur requir m view principl respect set framework would enabl us mitig buildup excess risk financi system contribut smooth function financi system singl market europ backdrop let final say word recent develop field europ first month extens discuss european bodi forum compromis reach european parliament may last ecofin meet may crd iv import develop look forward success trialogu council parliament commiss rapid progress agreement clear rule game crucial also view meet g commit time comprehens implement basel iii third regard propos regul approv council compromis text includ element would allow nation author appli measur fall singl rulebook macroprudenti purpos overal welcom develop critic remark regard text regul state clear calibr quantit limit tighten definit remain intact sinc way ensur direct compar prudenti ratio across eu also think list measur enlarg much instanc context agre propos risk weight certain exposur chang would distort compar ratio across member state let conclud say find right balanc principl singl rulebook requir flexibl implement macroprudenti measur nation level remain key polici challeng decis maker europ howev look develop financi market recent polici initi field m convinc establish effici wellfunct macroprudenti framework may substanti contribut smooth function singl market strengthen financi stabil framework latter would particular benefici euro area risk financi stabil transmit even faster elsewher lack trust part financi system felt across entir currenc area safeguard financi stabil euro area demand euro areawid perspect effect macroprudenti framework prevent side accompani wellfunct resolut mechan crisi manag side respect know ecb support establish financi union euro area base three element european deposit insur scheme european resolut fund euro area bank supervisori author briefli would entail first singl deposit insur scheme appli bank euro area avoid unfair complet second subset euro area financi institut system import oper signific crossbord would subject european resolut fund third subset system import financi institut would subject euro area bank supervisori author resolut fund would institut point nonviabl need resolv bailout go concern minim need public fund possibl moral hazard risk singl deposit guarante bank without mani subject european supervis would address instanc impos need pay insur countri would happen would contribut least replenish fund besid contribut clear commit futur euro project one key benefit arrang would ensur euro area bank financi system separ financi situat sovereign major step would accomplish overcom present european crisi consolid concret way futur monetari union see imf imffsb earli warn exercis design methodolog toolkit septemb see e g borio c p low asset price financi monetari stabil explor nexus bis work paper borio c m drehmann toward oper framework financi stabil fuzzi measur consequ bis work paper alessi l c detken realtim earli warn indic cost asset price boombust cycl ecb work paper imf assess system implic financi linkag global financi stabil report april page see instanc adrian m brunnermei covar feder reserv bank new york staff report septemb acharya v v l h pedersen philippon m richardson measur system risk new york univers work paper brownle c r f engl volatil correl tail system risk measur new york univers work paper see hautsch n j schaumberg m schienl financi network system risk contribut work paper see betz f oprica peltonen sarlin p predict bank distress identifi interdepend among european bank mimeo see allen f babus e carletti asset common debt matur system risk journal financi econom vol pp see caccioli f j d farmer n foti d rockmor stabil austrian bank system unpublish paper see gertler m n kiyotaki financi intermedi credit polici busi cycl analysi b friedman m woodford ed handbook monetari econom edit volum octob see goodhart c e kashyap d p tsomoco p vardoulaki financi regul general equilibrium nber work paper see adrian h shin financi intermediari monetari econom b friedman m woodford ed handbook monetari econom edit volum octob adrian colla p shin h financi friction pars evid financi crisi feder reserv bank new york staff report revis version march see geanakoplo j leverag cycl d acemoglu k rogoff m woodford ed nber macroeconom annual vol see brunnermei m n sannikov macroeconom model financi sector work paper see adrian h shin financi intermediari monetari econom b friedman m woodford ed handbook monetari econom edit volum octob maddaloni peydro j l bank risktak securit supervis low interest rate evid us euro area lend standard review financi studi ecb wp link http www ecb europa eupubpdfscpwpsecbwp pdf jimenez g ongena peydro j l saurina j credit suppli monetari polici identifi bank balancesheet channel loan applic american econom review wp link http www tilburgunivers eduwebwijsfilescenterongenapreprintsjopscc pdf see borio c zhu h capit regul risktak monetari polici miss link transmiss mechan bis wp n decemb see christiano l motto r rostagno m financi factor econom fluctuat ecb wp n cúrdia v m woodford credit spread monetari polici journal money credit bank supp gertler m p karadi model unconvent monetari polici mimeo see holló d m kremer m lo duca ciss composit indic system stress financi system ecb work paper march see instanc box june ecb financi stabil review system risk measur portfolio probabilist perspect measur default risk see regimeswitch methodolog box june financi stabil review address stress interbank market role unconvent monetari polici measur general liquid indic box ecb financi stabil review june understand financi market liquid see p sarlin peltonen map state financi stabil ecb work paper seri credit see instanc schwaab b koopman luca system risk diagnost coincid indic earli warn signal ecb work paper april commerci properti price see box decemb ecb financi stabil review residenti properti price see box ecb financi stabil review june see lo duca m peltonen macrofinanci vulner futur financi stress assess system risk predict system event ecb work paper march see contagion european debt crisi keynot lectur vítor constâncio vicepresid ecb bocconi universityintesa sanpaolo confer bank competit postcrisi world milan octob see special featur c june ecb financi stabil review evalu interconnected financi system basi actual simul network reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en