José Manuel González-Páramo: Financial market failures and public policies: A central banker’s perspective on the global financial crisis,06-02-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,12337,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,It is a great pleasure for me to participate in the XVI Meeting of Public Economics here in Granada, and to be able to share with you some analyses and reflections on the current financial crisis and the role of public policies in responding to it.The subject of my speech today deserves some explanation. We are currently experiencing one of the deepest and most complex crises witnessed by the world in many decades. At the root of the crisis, we find the combined effect of a number of market failures as well as regulatory failures that explain how the turmoil stemming from a relatively small segment of the US mortgage market has translated into a global crisis posing a number of challenges for our economies and societies. The notions of market and regulatory failures are at the heart of the Public Economics field. The current crisis also represents an extraordinary example of how stabilising the international and domestic financial systems and invigorating them in the medium-term required and will continue to demand cooperation among different public policies, ranging from macroeconomic to liquidity-related, regulatory and supervisory policies.I will structure my intervention in four parts. I will devote the first part to analysing the underlying causes that have contributed to the crisis. Later, I will broadly describe the policy responses given by the major players in the global economy from four different angles: liquidity policy, monetary policy, fiscal policy and regulatory reform. In the third section, I will discuss in depth the actions undertaken by central banks – with especial focus on the policies deployed by the ECB and the Eurosystem – and their rationale, as well as some of the challenges ahead. Finally, in the last part, I would like to make some considerations on the potential new environment for policy makers, and in particular for central banks, that may be a key legacy of the current crisis.The start of the financial crisis was triggered in the summer of 2007 by the realisation that the risks associated with the US market for sub-prime mortgages were not properly reflected in the price of related instruments, particularly mortgage-backed securities. A market-wide reassessment of financial risk led to sharp increases in premia and spreads across all segments of the credit market. The rapidly falling market values of credit instruments hit both the net worth and the profitability of the banking system.Tensions in the markets for credit instruments spread to the money markets in early August 2007, giving rise to concerns about systemic disruptions. Indeed, inter-bank trading came almost to a halt on 9 August as a result of the combination of: (1) exceptionally high uncertainty about potential direct exposures of banks to “toxic” assets; and (2) increased demand for liquidity to honour credit lines committed to so-called conduits (i.e. bank-sponsored off-balance sheet investment vehicles).Lack of transparency about the extent of exposures compounded uncertainty, preventing market participants from distinguishing good banks from bad banks, leading to a decline in trading in a real-life version of Akerlof’s “lemon market”. In addition, conduits had become over time increasingly reliant on the issuance of short-term paper for the funding of their securitisation activities. However, with the outbreak of the turmoil, they became unable to roll-over short-term financing in the asset backed commercial paper market amidst great uncertainty about asset valuations. Against this background, money market interest rates and spreads rose sharply, while liquidity dried up, prompting central banks to intervene through large-scale liquidity injections. [2]As the year 2007 went on, the fall in US housing prices accelerated against the backdrop of the rising number of foreclosures and the slowdown of the US economy. This led to an increase in the number of defaults in mortgages, not only for sub-prime mortgages but also for the prime segment of the markets. Thus, an increasing number of securities linked to mortgages turned out to be much riskier than previously thought.All major central banks around the globe continued to address market disruptions through significant liquidity injections. However, the losses in several important markets for financial assets continued to mount and in March 2008, the Fed had to engineer the rescue of Bear Stearns, then the fifth largest U.S. investment bank, by JP Morgan and grant direct access to its financing to the other main investment banks for the first time since the Great Depression.The financial turmoil deepened in the weeks following the collapse of the Lehman Brothers in mid-September 2008, more than a year after the onset of the crisis, eventually developing into a full-blown crisis with adverse spillovers into real activity. Within two weeks from the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, mounting losses from the sub-prime mortgage markets led to both the US largest insurance company (AIG) and largest savings and loan institution (Washington Mutual) being seized by the government. Widespread concerns about the solvency of financial institutions ensued and spread to Europe, where government assistance was needed to avert the collapse of several institutions.It goes without saying that, determining the appropriate policy responses to the crisis requires a thorough understanding of its underlying causes. For this purpose, it is important to distinguish the macroeconomic factors from those of a microeconomic nature.As for the macroeconomic factors, the roots of the current crisis may go as far back as the late 1990s, when global imbalances in current account positions and capital flows across major economies, particularly in the US, started to build up. At the time, several emerging economies enhanced fiscal discipline and recorded a collapse in investment, which contributed, alongside other factors, to substantial surpluses in savings-investment and current account balances. In the industrialised countries, corporate investment fell after the collapse of the IT bubble in 2001. Meanwhile, in the US private saving was falling, while domestic demand was expanding. Excess savings in the world outside the US - the so-called “savings glut” - together with accommodative global monetary conditions led to ample liquidity in the world financial markets and low interest rates across the maturity spectrum.Turning to more micro factors, financial innovation allowed the repackaging of mortgages - traditionally, illiquid assets originated and held by local banks - into higher-yielding complex securities with triple-A rating. Mortgage backed securities or more complex products based on those securities were in high demand by banks and investors around the world who were “searching for yield” in an environment characterised by low interest rates. The situation endured, as sustained appetite of foreign investors for debt securities issued by the US government and government-sponsored agencies as well as by the corporate sector allowed the country to smoothly finance its current account deficit.The “search for yield” fostered the demand for more complex forms of securitisation, which led to the creation of instruments that entailed risks that were difficult to assess and price. No active secondary market existed for many of the new instruments, and the associated opacity of the credit risk distribution made it difficult to keep track of the exposures.A key question is why investors did not look more closely into the risks associated with the securities purchased, thereby playing a disciplining role in the securitisation process. The answer leads us to an important microeconomic factor behind the current crisis: the existence of agency problems associated with the implementation of the “originate and distribute” model. This model – that became prevalent among large banks over the past twenty years – was designed to deliver a more efficient allocation and distribution of risks in the economy.However, because of information asymmetries and frictions, the “originate and distribute” model in practice gave rise to inefficient outcomes and distorted the behaviour of the various parties involved in the securitisation process: investors, rating agencies, intermediaries, and originators. [3] The main reason for this is that the goals of the parties involved differed, and in some instances may even have been in conflict. Besides, the different categories did not fully internalise the consequences of their individual actions in the overall process, and therefore did not have the right incentives to share information efficiently.In particular, investors became over-reliant on the ratings provided by the rating agencies and often did not properly conduct their due diligence. The fact that regulators gave ratings a prominent role in the risk assessment framework might have indirectly affected investors’ incentives. Investors often ignored the fact that rating agencies’ risk measures offer only a partial account of the risks embedded in the securities, as they focus primarily on the expected loss and do not take into account the tail of the loss distribution. In addition, they do not take liquidity risks into account.Moreover, rating agencies were themselves subject to potential conflicts of interest that may have diminished their incentives to undertake timely downgrades of structured products and provide adequate information to investors regarding the analysis underlying the rating decision. In fact, because ratings are paid for by issuers, rating agencies may have incentives to expand coverage to products whose risk assessment is difficult and, potentially unreliable, in order to maximise their revenues. Besides, agencies may also provide commercial advice to the issuers of those securities that are then requested to rate.As regards originators of loans, their incentives to screen and monitor borrowers may have been reduced under the “originate and distribute” model, once they sold the originated assets to intermediaries that subsequently took care of repackaging them into securities. Instead, the loan originators may have concentrated on expanding volumes of loans originated to boost their profits. The diminished incentive to screen and monitor borrowers implies that investors may have ultimately acquired assets of relatively lower quality and performance.This is compounded by the fact that the i ntermediaries, who purchased assets and bundled them into pools prior to securitising them, focused on maximising revenues stemming from the servicing fees charged to investors, without necessarily delivering the risk/return balance desired by investors.More in general, remuneration schemes based on rewarding short-term profits tended to predominate throughout the financial system, often to the detriment of the longer-term health of the financial institution. For example, compensation structures at the top management level are based on the comparison of latest results vis-à-vis those of their peers and thus tend to encourage short-termism and risk-taking by managers keen on avoiding underperformance. The pressure to deliver quick profits makes it more difficult for risk management departments, that are often viewed as “party spoilers”, to curb excessive risk taking in their financial institutions. The job of risk managers is also complicated by the fact that certain risks are hard to quantify and measure (for example, tail risks) and that commonly agreed valuation models are missing for more complex securities.These factors magnified the more general “pro-cyclical” tendencies of financial systems, which also stemmed from a host of other factors, such as accounting standards (e.g. mark-to-market accounting) and the dependence of collateral values and leverage ratios on asset prices.These structural incentive problems have not been fully taken into account by regulators and supervisors. The Basel I framework that was prevalent at the time of the turmoil’s outbreak (and still is) underestimated banks’ exposures by not capturing the bulk of the risks related to off-balance-sheet vehicles as well as liquidity and reputational risks.Supervisors and regulators should also have paid more attention to the challenge of regulatory arbitrage. In fact, some financial innovation processes were triggered – among other considerations – in order to circumvent the existing regulation, particularly on capital requirements. This aspect is even more pressing in the current environment, with large and complex financial institutions operating across borders, under different national regulatory and supervisory regimes. As I will mention below, an improved and closer cooperation and information sharing among central banks, regulators and supervisors at both national and international levels seems, therefore, essential.To sum up, we have seen that the causes of the current crisis can be traced back to macroeconomic imbalances and, at the micro level, to incentive problems and that regulatory and supervisory deficiencies have also played a role. Nonetheless, the crisis has once again shown the importance of system-wide externalities in propagating and exacerbating the crisis. Problems of individual banks may have wide and serious implications for both the financial system itself and the economy as a whole. Overall, banks must ultimately respond to losses on risky assets by raising new capital. New equity, however, may be difficult to be issued in sufficient amount in the short run. As a consequence, banks’ first responses have been both asset “fire sales” and the scaling back of their lending activity.These two effects affect the banking system widely. Widespread liquidation of assets in the current market conditions pushes prices down. Through mark-to-market accounting, declining asset prices lead to unwarranted contagion to other banks with similar assets. Those banks may be forced to adjust their positions by selling assets themselves, thus leading to further asset price declines. Similarly, when deciding to cut lending, banks may not internalise the repercussions of their decisions on the real economy in terms of foregone profitable investment opportunities, output and employment.Let me now turn to the public policy responses to the crisis, with a special emphasis on the common elements of the responses of the major players in the global economy.Central banks have established the first line of policy defence against the adverse dynamics set in motion by the financial crisis, particularly through the massive provision of liquidity. Although the specific responses have varied across central banks, since 9 August 2007 the common objective of these institutions has been to address the global liquidity squeeze, particularly in order to mitigate as much as possible the risk that protracted liquidity shortages turned into solvency problems.Central bank liquidity policies have not been limited to the shortest end of the money market rates, but have in some cases also sought to ease pressures in term funding markets. This has been pursued through an increased supply of longer-term funds. Access to central bank funding has also been facilitated by enlarging the list of collateral eligible for the central bank lending operations and by widening the range of counterparties with access to these operations. In some countries, central banks have also extended lending to non-depositary banks and to non-bank financial institutions. Additionally, some central banks have established securities lending facilities to improve the functioning of their interbank repo markets.An important characteristic of the global liquidity policy response to the financial crisis has been the strengthened cooperation among central banks. Cooperation has taken place first through enhanced information sharing and collective monitoring of market developments, and later on by taking coordinate steps to ease liquidity tensions in the global money markets.The first initiative in this direction was the agreement in December 2007 between the ECB and the US Federal Reserve to grant loans in US dollars to euro area counterparties in connection with the Fed’s Term Auction Facility (TAF). The US dollar-denominated loans to euro area banks were financed through a currency arrangement (swap line) between the two central banks.The US dollar liquidity-providing bilateral agreements between the Fed and the ECB (as well as between the Fed and a growing number of central banks [4]) under the TAF programme – that has become a symbol of the determination of the central banking community to address global liquidity tensions – has been significantly expanded over time in terms of scale. In addition, the Eurosystem has signed agreements with the central banks of several European countries in order to improve the provision of euro liquidity to their banking sectors.Finally, in a fortunately limited number of cases, central banks have assisted their domestic governments in providing emergency liquidity assistance to institutions under stress.Let me now quickly review the common elements of the measures taken by central banks from the perspective of monetary policy. The distinction between (1) liquidity management and (2) monetary policy is very important in the case of the ECB, since its strategy clearly separates the role of monetary policy in determining the optimal interest rate level required to maintain price stability from the role of its operational framework in ensuring that interest rate decisions are transmitted to the financial markets and the real economy in an effective manner.Although at different paces, reflecting differences in domestic macroeconomic conditions and specific monetary policy objectives, from the start of the crisis the major central banks around the world have also adjusted their respective monetary policy stances to reflect the diminished risks for price stability. By doing so, these institutions have clearly signalled the strong commitment of the international central banking community to anchor inflation expectations and addressing the macroeconomic background and the implications of the financial crisis.On the fiscal side, governments around the world have announced a number of initiatives in order to tackle the effects of the financial crisis. The nature of the fiscal measures has evolved with the development of the financial crisis and its propagation to the real economy.Government interventions initially focused on addressing problems at single institutions, mainly through rescues and provisions of guarantees. Some governments also announced measures to provide relief to struggling homeowners, and attempted to stimulate domestic economies, particularly in those countries where the slowdown in housing markets was more significant. Next, as the financial turmoil intensified and the need to support the entire financial system became clearer, the fiscal response in Europe and in the US evolved into more comprehensive plans designed to support entire domestic financial industries rather than individual institutions. Such plans typically comprised capital injections in exchange for equity and the more systematic provision of state guarantees. Finally, stimulus packages aimed at fostering aggregate demand have also been announced, as the adverse effects of the crisis have worked through the real economy.In parallel to the increase in the scope of fiscal measures, there has also been a rise in the degree of international policy coordination, reflecting the global nature and amplitude of the current crisis. The G-7 and G-20 summits have represented major steps for policy coordination at the global level, while at the EU level international cooperation has been shaped by the exceptional procedures from the European Commission to coordinate and accelerate national rescue plans, as well as by the European Economic Recovery Plan. This plan provides a common framework for the efforts made by Member States and by the EU, with a view to ensuring consistency and maximising their effectiveness, always in accordance with and within the framework of the Stability and Growth Pact.In addition, other types of fiscal measures are currently at work. As the economic crisis has deepened, a significant contribution to the fiscal adjustment may come from the so-called automatic stabilisers. These are programmes linked to social security and unemployment benefits, which are generally more comprehensive in Europe than in the US. As they act immediately and are proportionate to the depth of the business cycle, automatic stabilisers can be more timely and targeted than discretionary policies, and do not suffer from political economy risks that can undermine the effectiveness of the discretionary measures.The volume of public resources made available or committed by governments has no precedent. In this context, fiscal authorities should not forget that sustainability of the public finances is a pre-condition for the effectiveness of the extraordinary measures. Some of the fiscal stimulus packages that have been adopted recently in Europe have raised some concerns, as some of them have been adopted in countries where the fiscal situation already calls for particular prudence regarding its sustainability. Governments around the world, but especially in countries where the presence of automatic stabilisers is significantly important, should take the prospective burden of such stabilisers into account when designing their overall fiscal plans.Regarding regulatory reforms, the competent authorities at both the European and the global level have been actively involved in the development of measures aimed at restoring market confidence and enhancing the stability of the financial system.At the European level, policy action has been guided by the ECOFIN Roadmap which identified four priority areas: (1) enhancing transparency, (2) improving valuation standards, (3) reinforcing prudential rules and risk management, and (4) improving market functioning.These priorities have been mirrored at the international level by the Financial Stability Forum in its proposal of April 2008 (consisting of a set of 67 recommendations), subsequently endorsed by the G7 ministers and central bank governors). To recall, the Financial Stability Forum brings together central banks, banking supervisors and finance ministries from the largest world economies. The Forum also involves international institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the Bank for International Settlements. In recognition of the global dimension of the current financial crisis, the G20 Finance Ministers and central bank Governors’ acknowledged in their November meeting last year, the need to expand the FSF membership to include also key emerging market economies. This is expected to contribute to further enhancing the FSF’s ability to coordinate global efforts towards a more resilient financial system.Central banks have acted on three different fronts to tackle the crisis, namely liquidity management, monetary policy and financial stability. Over the next few minutes I would like to share with you some reflections on the policy actions that central banks in general – and the ECB in particular – have undertaken and on the challenges that we are likely to face in each of these three areas.Before discussing liquidity management interventions, it is useful to recall that the ECB’s measures to provide support to money markets have been based on the fundamental principle of the separation between monetary policy decisions and their implementation.This principle is important in order to reduce the risk that economic agents may mistakenly interpret volatility in short-term money market rates, triggered by temporary and unpredictable fluctuations in liquidity conditions, as containing information on the desired monetary policy stance (which is instead given by the rate applied to the main refinancing operations). The separation principle has proved to be particularly effective during the financial market turmoil and at times of high volatility in the short-term money market rates.Let me now try to explain in somewhat greater detail the rationale behind the operational measures of the Eurosystem during the financial market turmoil.From the start of the turmoil until the collapse of Lehman Brothers in mid-September 2008, the ECB engaged in active liquidity management by adjusting the temporal and quantitative distribution of its liquidity provision within the maintenance period [5]. Besides, from October 2007, the Eurosystem has engaged in increasing international cooperation to ease tensions in global money markets, particularly by facilitating the access of euro area banks to US dollar liquidity.Through the adjustments to its euro operations, the ECB responded to the perceived change in the pattern of banks’ demand for liquidity over the maintenance period, in particular responding to the increasing evidence that interest rates were no longer necessarily linked to liquidity conditions on the last day of the maintenance period (as postulated by the so-called “martingale hypothesis”). Indeed, unlike in normal times, banks seemed to no longer regard reserve holdings on different days of the maintenance period as substitutes. By contrast, there was evidence of the emergence of precautionary demand for liquidity early in the maintenance period.As mentioned earlier, the shift in the time pattern for liquidity demand was related not only to the fact that counterparties were reluctant to lend to each other on unsecured terms, but also to their fear of being confronted with unexpected liquidity shocks. As a consequence, banks seemed to prefer reducing their so-called “liquidity gaps”, also by fulfilling their reserve requirements relatively early in the maintenance period.The rise in precautionary demand implied a pricing of liquidity that was inconsistent with the martingale hypothesis, which prompted the ECB to bringing its supply of liquidity forward in the maintenance period – i.e. to “ frontload” – in order to achieve the same level of short term interest rates as before. Concretely, the ECB accommodated banks’ preference for the front-loading of reserves by systematically allotting more than the so-called “benchmark” amount in its weekly main refinancing operations. The allotments above the benchmark were reduced in the course of the maintenance period so that the average supply of liquidity over the entire maintenance period remained unchanged. [6]In the same vein, the ECB increased the amount of refinancing provided via longer-term refinancing operations, with a view to reduce the liquidity gaps of the banking system and to smooth conditions in the term money market. It correspondingly reduced the amounts allotted at the weekly main refinancing operations so that the total amount of outstanding liquidity supply remained unchanged.Indeed, during the early phases of the turmoil, the Eurosystem aimed at keeping the overall level of euro refinancing provided to the banking sector at levels close to those prevailing just before the turmoil, in line with its longstanding policy of providing the banking system only with the amount of liquidity needed to smoothly fulfil its aggregate liquidity deficit over each maintenance period. The Eurosystem’s intermediation role in support of the affected segments of the euro money market was therefore mainly achieved by adjusting the modalities of the liquidity supply operations.Following the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September last year, the financial market turmoil entered a more intense and disruptive phase, in which the money market became to a large extent dysfunctional. In response to the deterioration of market conditions, the Eurosystem stepped up its temporary intermediation activity to ensure that the dysfunctions of the money market did not drive solvent banks out of business. Out of the various measures implemented, perhaps the most important was the switch to fixed-rate tender procedures with full allotment in all refinancing operations – not only euro credit operations with maturities of 1 week up to 6 months, but also the ECB’s US dollar operations with maturities from 1 week to 3 months – against a temporarily enlarged set of collateral.In practice, these measures imply that the ECB’s counterparties – which represent a very large number of euro area credit institutions – can now borrow as much euro and US dollar liquidity as they wish, both at the weekly and at some key term maturities, against a larger than usual set of eligible assets. As a result, the amount of euro refinancing provided by the Eurosystem in collateralised dollar operations in euro and US dollar is currently close to EUR 900 billion.Overall, the ECB’s liquidity measures during the more recent phase of the turmoil have focussed on addressing liquidity shortfalls in the interbank market, but have not (and could not) address the problem of heightened counterparty credit-risk aversion. The situation in the euro money market is still far from normal, being still significantly affected by elevated level of risk aversion and information asymmetry.The Eurosystem has moved from the situation before the start of the turmoil, in which it did not provide more refinancing to the banking system than was needed to satisfy the aggregate liquidity needs arising from autonomous factors and reserve requirements, to the present situation in which it effectively intermediates liquidity flows among individual banks. Therefore, the clearing of intra-bank liquidity flows has to a large extent moved from the dysfunctional money market to the Eurosystem’s balance sheet. Reflecting the increased role played in financial intermediation, the Eurosystem’s consolidated balance sheet (weekly financial statement) has increased by around 60% since the start of the turmoil [7].Taking up a significant intermediation role to guarantee the orderly functioning of our economy was certainly essential in the wake of the collapse of Lehman Brothers, when an unprecedented deterioration in the degree of public confidence in the banking sectors of most developed economies seemed to undermine in a fundamental manner the ability of banks to perform their institutional financial intermediation function. It should not be forgotten that, while the euro area financial landscape has significantly changed in recent decades as a result of a number of structural developments (including the introduction of the euro), it is still predominantly “bank-based”. As a result, dysfunctions of the banking system have a relatively larger potential to cause disruptions to the economy in the euro area than in other regions of the world.Of course, taking up an extensive intermediation role is not acceptable in the long-term for a market-oriented economy like the euro area. The increased intermediation role of the Eurosystem is only a temporary answer to the dysfunction of money markets and is now without potential disadvantages, including disincentives for banks to resume normal trading activity and also potentially increased financial risks for the Eurosystem (which are nevertheless mitigated through adequate risk control measures).Thus, while the Eurosystem is determined to continue supporting the banking system through its enhanced liquidity policy for as long as needed, it also looks forward to the reactivation of inter-bank lending and to banks resuming their traditional intermediation activity. Indeed, an exit strategy from the exceptional temporary measures undertaken in support of the banking sector will be considered in conjunction with the progressive restoring of normal conditions in money markets.In the meantime, banks must show willingness to re-establish credit lines and to de-stigmatise interbank borrowing. In this regard, while it is clear that the financial market turmoil must necessarily imply an adjustment in banks’ risk management, it seems to me that the current very conservative behaviour of individual banks, characterised by a strong reduction in credit lines and little appetite to actually assess and price credit risk, even at the very shortest segments of the money market, is not in the long-term interest of the banking system.Financial intermediation in the euro area has traditionally been to a large extent conducted via the banking system, rather than via capital markets (unlike in the US and other Anglo-Saxon countries). The difference in relative importance of the banking systems and capital markets may explain to a large extent why, in the course of the current crisis, the Eurosystem’s efforts have focused on providing support to traditional banks, while other central banks, such as the Fed, have also extended their support to other financial institutions.Since the inception of the euro, the Eurosystem’s operational framework has granted access to the Eurosystem’s credit operations to a very large number of counterparties [8], both via the marginal lending facility and the open market operations. Counterparty eligibility criteria have been defined in general terms so that a wide range of depository institutions, including small saving banks and co-operative banks, have direct access to central bank liquidity. The combination of a large list of counterparties and a similarly wide range of assets eligible as collateral (recently expanded further on a temporary basis), has proven very useful during the turbulence, since it has allowed the Eurosystem to reach a very large number of financial intermediaries at a time when short-term interbank markets are not functioning properly.The financial crisis has radically changed the environment of monetary policy making. The rises in oil and commodity prices that generated concerns about upside risks to price stability in recent years suddenly stopped in the course of 2008. The materialisation of downside risks to growth and the decline in inflationary pressures (largely due to falling commodity prices and the effect of the deepening of the financial crisis and its spread to the real economy) have led to a significant reduction in upside risks to price stability. From today’s perspective, the Great Moderation, the era of remarkable macroeconomic performance started in the mid-1980s, appears surprisingly remote. Monetary policy makers have had to adapt quickly to the present macroeconomic and financial environment, which can be best characterised by the concept of non-measurable risk, or “Knightian” uncertainty. As you know, the economist Frank Knight developed a distinction between “risks” ( to which probabilities can be assigned), and “uncertainty” (for which even these probabilities are unknown). The very sharp increase in uncertainty that is typical of periods of financial instability had immediate consequences in the risk premia that lead to a strong preference for safe and liquid assets. Allow me to focus for a second on the evolution of the risk premia and its implications for the conduct of monetary policy over the more recent period. Since the beginning of the financial turmoil in the summer of 2007, financial markets have gone through a dramatic process of gradual revaluation and re-pricing of risk, not only in the US and the euro area, but also across the world. Following the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, the deterioration of financial markets accelerated. Investors’ loss of risk appetite, as well as the reassessment of credit and liquidity risk, has been reflected in significant rises in credit and CDS spreads. This is a phenomenon that has particularly affected firms with lower ratings (both in the financial sector and in other sectors).During this turbulent period, we have faced substantial impairments to the transmission of policy rates to the money markets. This is most evident from the strong increase in the spread between the Euribor rates (indicative rates for unsecured lending among banks) and the corresponding euro overnight index swap rates (Eonia swap rates), compared to the levels prevailing before the turmoil. This development reflects the reluctance of banks to lend to each other and is closely related to a general lack of transparency – as I mentioned earlier – about the magnitude of exposures that individual banks carry on their books.The transmission of monetary policy decisions to very short-term money markets is just the first step along the transmission mechanism. Such decisions are subsequently passed through to bank lending rates, which represent one of the key channels through which monetary policy affects the economy. We know that, reflecting contractual arrangements and banking practices, in many countries a variety of bank lending interest rates tend to adjust in line with the three-month Euribor rather than the policy rate. This implies that the borrowing costs of households and firms increased considerably before October 2008, also relative to the policy rate. More recently, most bank interest rates have started to decrease substantially reflecting the lowering of policy and money market rates started in October 2008. As a result of the continuing decrease of Euribor rates, we can expect further reductions in bank lending rates. We have also observed some signs of easing conditions for risk premia in financial markets at the end of 2008.Looking in particular at the monetary policy reaction to the crisis, the size of the cumulated interest rate reductions, especially since the coordinated interest-rate cut on 8 October 2008 with five other major central banks (Bank of Canada, Bank of England, the Federal Reserve, Sveriges Riksbank and Swiss National Bank) has been exceptional and has left the policy rates of most central banks at historically low levels.This environment is not devoid of challenges for monetary policy. It is quite obvious that if a central bank keeps cutting rates, sooner or later it will hit its lower bound. However, this alone should not necessarily imply the end of monetary policy effectiveness, as other channels may remain available for the central bank to additionally stimulate the economy in order to achieve its monetary policy objective. The central bank, for instance, can change the size and/or the composition of its balance sheet, two categories of unconventional measures which nowadays are commonly referred to as “quantitative and qualitative easing”, respectively. Through both these channels and specific commitment technologies, the central bank might influence term and credit risk premia, and thus shape the yield curve and the cost of funds to the private sector even when the short-term nominal interest rate is constrained by the lower bound.In this respect, it is crucial not trying to make a virtue of necessity. Dramatic unconventional measures entail non-trivial risks and their impact is subject to a high degree of uncertainty. It is important to stress that a precondition for more radical unconventional quantitative easing measures (e.g. the large-scale purchase of government bonds by the central bank) is that the standard interest rates policy and what we could define as more “conventional” quantitative easing measures (e.g. the provision of support to the banking sector and the economy at large through expanded liquidity provision and inclusive collateral policies), are deemed insufficient to ensure the credible anchoring of price stability. As I will discuss in the Section 4, before embarking on more unconventional measures, a central bank is likely not only to fully use its policy rate instrument, but also to exhaust all other options in its existing toolbox in order to preserve price stability.And, of course, a successful outcome of the more dramatic unconventional actions depends on a sound communication with the public and on the existence of a clear, credible commitment of the central bank with respect to achieving its monetary policy objective (a well-defined definition of price stability in the case of the ECB). The central bank must explain the reasons and the mechanism through which these unconventional monetary policy channels operate. It is of crucial importance that the public does not receive the wrong impression that the central is powerless in the face of deflationary pressures in an environment of extremely low nominal interest rates. By contrast, the public must be convinced that the central bank will take the necessary actions to prevent the entrenchment of unacceptable deviations from its monetary policy objective into private sector expectations.This being said, an environment of zero or almost zero interest rates may bring other policy challenges that go beyond the strict effectiveness of monetary policy. For example, in such an environment the interbank money markets are likely to be disrupted – as the Japanese experience demonstrates –, and institutions such as money market funds may be put under threat. While monetary policy could still be effective, an impaired money market has serious consequences for the private financial intermediation and eventually poses difficulties for the transmission of monetary policy and the optimal asset allocation within the economy as well as risks to financial stability.An additional challenge for central banks is the concern that the lower rates go the more difficult might become to reverse this policy, thus making it more likely that today’s monetary policy may compromise future price stability and financial stability. The experience of the Eurosystem in 2005 is a clear reminder of the pressures that a central banks faces when it decides to start removing policy accommodation.Moving to a different subject, let me now recall that the adjustment to the ECB policy rate started with a coordinated move with five other major central banks (Bank of Canada, Bank of England, the Federal Reserve, Sveriges Riksbank and Swiss National Bank) on October 2008. This coordinated interest rate cut was unprecedented by historical standards and was very much welcomed as a sign of the strong commitment of the international central banking community to addressing the macroeconomic implications of the financial market turmoil. It also gave rise to the question whether the financial crisis may have ushered in a new era in which the global nature of the challenges faced by central banks requires increased international monetary policy coordination.The economic literature on policy coordination [9] suggests that, under normal conditions, the international integration of goods and services markets provides a relatively high degree of risk pooling that makes mechanisms of formal policy coordination less necessary. This conclusion is derived from the fact that rule-based policies funded on common principles and with medium-term orientation anchor expectations and confidence so that the symmetric stabilisation of domestic conditions brings about stable global conditions as well.The financial crisis, however, has shown that, if not from policy coordination, there are important benefits from cooperation in an increasingly integrated world economy, where adverse shocks to one market are not confined by national borders but rather propagate globally at a rapid pace. Indeed, while a coordinated rate cut is by nature exceptional, cooperation in different areas among world major central banks has proven to be an effective policy response to global and domestic challenges, supporting confidence at times of heightened uncertainty. As explained before, during the current crisis, cooperation among central banks has been pursued in two main directions: (1) through enhanced information exchanges and collective monitoring of markets developments; and (2) through coordinated steps to provide liquidity.As a third front for central bank policy action, let me now discuss the measures taken in the financial stability field. Contributing to financial stability is one of the core responsibilities assigned by the EC Treaty to the ECB. By pursuing its primary objective of maintaining price stability and by contributing to the smooth functioning of the money markets, the ECB prevents unnecessary volatility from being introduced into economic activity and financial markets, thus providing an important contribution to safeguarding financial stability in the euro area, particularly at times of crisis like the present.In addition, central banks (of course, including the ECB) have actively participated in a wide range of international committees and fora entrusted with the task of restoring market functioning and enhancing the resilience of the financial system.Priority has been given to restoring market confidence. In this context, initiatives designed to strengthen transparency and valuation standards should be singled out as pivotal. In particular, improvements were warranted in the disclosure standards for financial institutions’ exposures to structured products as well as in the practices followed for their valuation. In this respect, many large global banks have consistently applied the disclosure methodology set out in the FSF report to their holdings of complex and illiquid instruments, thus demonstrating the willingness of the private sector to contribute to strengthening market confidence. Furthermore, guidance has been provided by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision on assessing banks’ fair value practices for financial instruments.In the same vein, the International Accounting Standards Board has intensified its work to enhance accounting and disclosure standards of off-balance sheet entities and released draft guidance on fair value measurement when markets become inactive. Central banks as well as banking supervisors have contributed to this work by participating in the related expert advisory panel. Furthermore, the ECB is also a member of the newly-created Financial Crisis Advisory Group whose primary role is to advise the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and the US Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) about the standard-setting implications of the global financial crisis and the potential changes to the global regulatory environment.While the aforementioned measures significantly improved the information available to markets, investors and competent authorities, the failure of Lehman Brothers last September generated an unprecedented deterioration in the degree of confidence in the banking sector triggering the coordinated action of governments. In this context, the European Heads of State adopted a set of common principles aimed at addressing the financial turmoil and ensuring that the design of national stabilisation measures did not lead to negative spill-over effects across countries. The “EU common principles” endorsed at the European Council of 15-16 October laid down the common features for granting guarantees on new issuance of bank debt and recapitalisation measures adopted by the Member States.The Governing Council of the ECB contributed to this work by proposing recommendations encompassing the provision of government guarantees for bank debt and recapitalisation measures. First, the Governing Council of the ECB proposed a set of recommendations on the framework for granting government guarantees, which identified the following main objectives for this measure: (1) addressing the funding problems of solvent banks; (2) safeguarding the level-playing field among financial institutions in order to avoid market distortions; and (3) ensuring consistency with the operational framework of the Eurosystem, to avoid impairing the implementation of the single monetary policy. Furthermore, these recommendations included a pricing system for the government guarantees on bank debt.The EU governments agreed to provide guarantees for new medium-term bank senior debt (up to 5 years) under a scheme to expire on 31 December 2009. Banks have begun to make use of this measure: at the beginning of 2009, the outstanding volume of government guaranteed unsecured bank bonds amounted to EUR 58 billion in the euro area, and EUR 97 billion in the EU. More banks have indicated their intentions to issue similar bonds. It should be noted that the issuances have so far been oversubscribed and spreads of such government guaranteed bonds are lower than those for secured bonds from the same country and with a comparable maturity.Second, with regard to recapitalisation measures, the Governing Council of the ECB also provided recommendations. The main aim of these measures has been to improve the functioning and stability of the banking system and to foster an adequate flow of credit to the economy by providing Tier I capital to fundamentally sound institutions. This would be carried out by acquiring equity in the form of ordinary shares, preferred shares or other hybrid instruments, such as subordinated debt. The total commitments regarding recapitalisation schemes reached EUR 255 billion in December 2008. [10]Also in this regard, the Governing Council of the ECB proposed a methodology for benchmarking the pricing of State recapitalisation measures for fundamentally sound institutions in the euro area. These recommendations are without prejudice to guidance from the European Commission aimed at avoiding undue distortions to competition in accordance with State aid rules of the Treaty.The pricing system proposed by the Governing Council of the ECB considered that any recapitalisation should take into consideration the specific market situation of each institution, distinguishing in particular between fundamentally sound and distressed banks. Based on this premise, it provided for a required rate of return, captured by a “price corridor”, which varies depending on the type of instrument. The lower band of this corridor is applied to instruments with features similar to those of subordinated debt and the higher band to those with features similar to ordinary shares. It is also recommended that the temporary nature of recapitalisation measures should be ensured by providing financial institutions with incentives to redeem such instruments and that the pricing system be revised periodically to reflect possible changes in market conditions.Overall, I am fully confident that the actions taken by central banks and national governments provide an appropriate response to the challenges raised by recent events. Still, restoring market functioning and returning to normal market conditions ultimately depends on the banking sector. In this context, reactivating the interbank market and ensuring the proper financing of the economy is of the utmost importance.Up to now, I have delved into the underlying causes of the current situation, and have discussed the various policy responses announced or implemented by different competent authorities, and the envisaged challenges ahead, especially for those areas that are under the partial or exclusive competence of central banks. Looking forward, the current crisis is likely to bring important changes for the future of the economic and financial systems in which we live. These include revisions to the regulatory and supervisory domains, reforms of the international financial architecture as well as changes in the nature of the relationships and coordination among the different policies and public authorities. Therefore, we are likely to witness a number of institutional changes that are likely to bring a new environment for policy making in a number of areas, including several aspects related to central banking.In the last part of my intervention, I would like to share with you some thoughts on this potential new environment.Since August 2007 central banks have responded in a variety of ways to the financial market disruptions, reflecting differences in the extent to which markets have been hit by the turbulences, and differences in the design of their operational frameworks. However, in general all major central banks stepped up their intermediation role with a view to addressing the liquidity squeeze and, in doing so, they showed a certain degree of convergence in operating procedures. In particular, central banks:Pursued more active reserve management, reassuring banks of their orderly access to overnight funds and increasing the frequency of their operations.Increased the supply of funds (notably long-term); expanded to varying degrees the definition of collateral accepted in collateralised lending operations; provided access to collateralised lending to a large number of counterparties.Adapted tender procedures for open market operations in the direction of price- rather than quantity-based schemes, akin to those used for standing facilities.As the turbulence developed, central banks strengthened their cooperation through enhanced communication and collective market monitoring and co-ordinated actions to provide liquidity. In this respect, a significant number of inter-central bank swap lines have been set up to facilitate the distribution of foreign currency liquidity to domestic counterparties.Overall, one lesson we can draw from the turmoil is that are certain key operational features that facilitate the implementation of monetary policy under stress. In particular, central banks are better positioned to distribute reserves effectively when the inter-bank lending is impaired if they are capable of providing access to collateralised lending operations on a large scale to a wide set of counterparties and against a broad range of collateral.Yet, a very important issue, on which I have myself no clear answer, is how – not so much whether but rather how – this convergence in the understanding of the “optimal” features of the operational framework under stress, should be reflected by the design of the operational framework in the steady state. For this we need, in particular, to develop a better understanding of the optimal mix between private market and central bank intermediation and we need to carefully liaise with supervisory bodies.I should clarify that when I say “optimal” in this context, I do not mean “uniform”. To the extent that monetary policy strategies, central banks’ status vis-à-vis governments and certain specific features of domestic financial systems persist, the optimal liquidity frameworks of each country or monetary union should reflect such country- or area-specific factors.In the previous section, I have discussed an issue that has come to fore in the current crisis: the provision of central bank liquidity to financial institutions other than banks. An additional issue that has come up in the last few months concerns the extent to which central banks may engage in direct lending to the real economy. This is not a purely theoretical subject for central banking conferences, as the recent establishment by the Federal Reserve System of several liquidity facilities directed to non banks shows (for instance, those in support directed to money market funds and issuers of commercial paper).In principle, the scope for direct lending by the central bank to the real economy should depend on the extent that the malfunctioning of the money and credit markets distorts bank lending and prevents aggregate households and businesses from obtaining credit. In that sense, some central banks have decided to bypass the banking system and start lending to households and firms directly for the sake of preserving the orderly functioning of the economy.In practice, even abstracting from possible legal constraints (i.e. monetary financing to state), there are several issues that central banks must ponder before deciding on the appropriateness for their own economies of providing directly financing to the real sectors. I stress the term “own” because this is one of those cases in which there is no unique answer. Whether or not a central bank engages in direct lending will very much depend on a number of considerations referring to structural features of the economy, the gravity of the crisis, the state of the financial system and a number of institutional factors, notably those governing the relationship between the central bank and the government.For instance, one apparently straightforward observation is that the need to provide direct credit to the economy at times of dysfunctions in banking activity, is likely to depend on the relative importance of the banking sector for financial intermediation. Following this argument, one may argue that in a bank-based economy there may be relatively less need to provide credit to agents other than banks than in a market-based economy. Indeed, by focusing on providing support to the banking sector, the central bank may increase its chances to sustain the economy as a whole. However, under extreme circumstances (notably, when the banking sector reneges on its institutional role as the main engine of financial intermediation), a central bank may reach the opposite conclusion: exactly because of the banking sector’s predominance in financial intermediation, its dysfunctional state might prompt a central bank to intervene before the entire economy comes to a halt.If so, the central bank will need to decide which sectors to target. Once again, this is not an easy choice. It may imply the need for the central bank to take decisions on the optimal allocation of resources in the economy that, historical experience shows, are better left to the private sector.Other concerns may relate to the risk of political pressure and government interference, especially in case the scale of the financing programme requires support from the Treasury. If financing is ensured through the expansion of the central bank’s liabilities, this may give rise to more general concerns about the fiscal costs of actions taken by the monetary authority. [11] Finally, but related to the previous arguments, direct lending to the real economy may imply an increase in the financial risks taken by the central bank, potential exposing the latter to risk to its financial independence and, ultimately, to its institutional independence.The purpose of these remarks is certainly not to suggest that central banks should abstain from direct lending to the real sectors, but rather to point out that the number of aspects to consider before doing so are so many and of such complexity that no central bank would ever take such decision with a light heart. This is why, before embarking in such policy, some central banks may prefer pursuing to the maximum extent the opportunities provided by its operational framework to provide indirect support (i.e. using the banking sector as an intermediary) to the real economy.One practical way of providing indirect support to the private sector pursued by the Eurosystem is through its liquidity operations and collateral framework. Indeed, by providing banks with unlimited access at fixed rates to its refinancing operations and by accepting a wide range of private paper as collateral, the Eurosystem effectively supports the provision of credit to the real economy.As we have seen, policy responses both at the global and European level have been characterised by an increasing degree of coordination. A natural question therefore seems to be whether, looking forward, more policy coordination at the level of the EU/euro area should be warranted. Given the existence of the single currency in the euro area, I will first focus on the coordination among national fiscal policies.On the fiscal side, a key challenge for the future is to prevent the financial crisis from eventually undermining the sustainability and credibility of public finances. What can we do to prevent this from happening? At this point, let me reiterate that the Stability and Growth Pact already provides a coordination device for fiscal policies and especially provides peer pressure mechanisms for sound and sustainable public finances. It provides the appropriate framework for the conduct and coordination of fiscal policies in good times and also in bad times.The challenge at times of crisis is thus to use this existing mechanism to the best effect. To put it rather bluntly, we should not tinker with the keel just because the wind is strong; the pact is already flexible enough to allow room for the policy to adjust without undermining the foundations for a sustainable path. Indeed, EU countries are already facing considerable long-term challenges from the costs associated with population ageing that should be borne in mind when considering short term demand policies. If the starting position is less strong, an inappropriate short-term response may make us literally “age faster” by exposing even more strongly the need for adjustments to cope with the long-term challenges. Countries with large deficit and/or debt levels may be particularly vulnerable in this regard.Unfortunately, many euro area countries entered the financial crisis and the economic downturn with unnecessarily weak fiscal balances, having missed the opportunity presented by past years’ revenue windfalls to consolidate their budgets. While this is never a popular message even in normal times, it still deserves mention so that the mistakes can be avoided once the crisis has passed. Indeed one of the fiscal policy errors prior to and including 2000-01 was to mistakenly interpret budgetary improvements in good times as evidence of structural improvements, which were often used to motivate spending increases or tax cuts.On a positive note we can note that while compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact during its first ten years has been somewhat uneven, the EU’s overall fiscal performance in terms of avoiding high budget deficits and the build-up of government debt was much better than in the decades preceding the Pact. [12] Indeed, some of the EU countries that comply with the Stability and Growth Pact can now take advantage of their relatively large automatic stabilisers to do much of the work. These accomplishments should be a guiding beacon ahead. Sound fiscal policies with a strong keel provide the basis for stability and the necessary conditions for good long-term growth in the challenging seas ahead.One additional dimension of policy coordination in the euro area is that between the single monetary policy and the national fiscal policies of the member states. In this respect, the institutional set-up of the European Monetary Union consists of a clear and efficient assignment of objectives and instruments to the different authorities, together with a strict division of responsibilities. The ECB must focus on its primary mandate of delivering medium term price stability under conditions of full independence. Fiscal policy must focus on its traditional objectives related to allocation, redistribution and stabilisation (to varying extents), while contributing to maintaining an environment of macroeconomic stability.Of course, in setting monetary policy the ECB takes into account the fiscal policy stance, as one of the factors which contribute to the outlook for price stability over the medium term. It goes without saying that an open exchange of views and information among the different authorities is welcome if it enhances a common understanding of desirable objectives and strategies to pursue them.However, there cannot be any scope for an active co-ordination of fiscal and monetary policies. Indeed, a commitment to ex ante co-ordination between fiscal and monetary policies may blur the responsibilities of the various authorities at the expense of accountability and may ultimately reduce their incentives to pursue their objectives. Thus, the current macroeconomic policy framework in the euro area based on a separation of responsibilities is the most appropriate to ensure sustained and non-inflationary economic growth.While cooperation in the field of liquidity management on an unprecedented scale has been certainly one of the hallmarks of public responses to the current turmoil, another example without precedents of central bank coordination was the decision by the ECB and other five major central banks to ease global monetary conditions on 8 October 2008. Commentators and observers have wondered whether this concerted policy decision may be the beginning of a new era of increased international monetary policy coordination in response to economic and financial globalisation.It is important to stress that this coordinated interest rate cut was taken in a specific context and with a specific objective. There was extraordinary uncertainty at the time about the economic outlook and strong evidence that upside risks to price stability had diminished at the global level. The coordinated cut addressed the need to respond to a common shock that was being transmitted around the globe almost simultaneously. Through the joint communication, the international central banking community provided a signal of its strong commitment to responding to the macroeconomic implications of the financial market turmoil.There is no doubt that over the past three decades the trade, economic and financial linkages among the different regions of the work have grown tighter, and of course policy-makers take this into account in the design of their policies. However, when talking about international policy coordination, it is important to define clearly what we mean. Policy coordination does not mean, of course that all central banks need to adopt the same policy stance for the entire world and certainly it cannot not be a surrogate for domestic macroeconomic prudence nor weaken the commitment of each central bank to its institutional objective.Indeed, differences in cyclical positions, structures of the economies (e.g. in terms of market rigidities and frictions, sectoral leverage, financial systems, etc.), monetary policy institutional frameworks as well as shocks hitting the economy almost necessarily lead to differences in deciding the appropriate monetary policy stance. Thus, systematic monetary policy coordination may eventually come at the cost of weaken a central bank’s commitment to its institutional objective.International policy coordination is better understood as the continuous cooperation and exchange of information at both staff and decision-making levels, shared experienced and mutual understanding and trust, which very much lies on the consensus among central banks that monetary policies geared towards domestic price stability, sound public finances and flexible economic structures create the conditions for long-term economic growth and financial stability.Another interesting debate that has gained – for obvious reasons – renewed interest and strength over the past year is the role that asset prices should take in the monetary policy design. Indeed, as we are experiencing at present, large volatility in asset prices can jeopardise the stability of the financial system and potentially undermine macroeconomic stability. The repetition of boom-bust cycles and the potentially very high costs for macroeconomic stability associated with the typically abrupt reversal of excessive valuation of assets beg the question: should monetary policy give more weight to asset prices?What have we learned on asset price bubbles and monetary policy? We know that bubbles are extremely difficult to identify in real time. Given that the assessment of whether or not asset price are being driven by fundamentals is surrounded with uncertainty, perhaps even sometimes uncertainty in the “Knigthian” sense, central banks should refrain from targeting asset prices. Moreover, while monetary policy actions can influence asset price developments, the magnitude of the swings in policy rates that would be needed to curb boom and bust cycles in asset prices could have adverse implications for macroeconomic stability in the short term.Based on these conclusions, which are broadly shared in the central banking and academic community, one option is to do nothing until the bubble bursts and then ease monetary policy aggressively to provide support to the banking system and the economy (the so-called “mop up after” approach). The downside of this strategy is of course that it risks creating moral hazard. A possible alternative approach that has been suggested consists of “ leaning against the wind”. According to this approach, the central bank should conduct a slightly tighter monetary policy than warranted by its price-stability objective, when the build-up of a potentially detrimental asset price boom is identified. By doing so, the central bank would buy insurance against the risk of a harmful asset boom-bust cycle, with its potential costs in terms of macroeconomic and financial stability.The main argument against this approach is that the premium stemming from such a policy framework may be excessively high. In fact, a policy response to asset price increases may end up destabilising the economy if the asset price revaluation is driven by fundamentals. This risk is related to the difficulty that I have just mentioned concerning the identification of asset price misalignments in real time. This risk, however, should not act as a perfect alibi justifying policy inaction. As the recent literature on early indicators started by researchers at BIS shows, different indicators can help the policy maker figure out the nature and the consequences of the reverse phase [13] of extraordinary asset price developments, and thereby define the need for policy action.Overall, the very high costs of the current financial crisis seem to provide support to the case for a flexible “leaning against the wind” strategy. How can one implement such a policy in practice? I would like to stress that the ECB’s two-pillar monetary policy strategy is well suited to cope with the challenges brought about by asset price developments [14]. There is a close link between monetary and credit developments and evolving imbalances in asset and credit markets. By exploiting this link, our monetary analysis (consisting of a comprehensive assessment of the liquidity situation) may provide early information on developing asset price imbalances and therefore allow for a timely response to the implied risks to price and financial stability. Thus, the ECB’s two-pillar strategy may represent a practical way of mimicking the “leaning against the wind” approach.The recent financial market crisis has also highlighted the important role that not only the ECB but all central banks play in safeguarding financial stability and the need to increase interaction between central banks and banking supervisors. This need for increased interaction, also identified by the Financial Stability Forum in one of its recommendations, would further support and enhance the central banks’ role in financial stability assessments, crisis management and resolution, and liquidity provision.First , with regard to  financial stability assessment: central banks can benefit from extended access to supervisory information especially in relation to systemically relevant institutions, in order to identify risks and vulnerabilities for the financial system as a whole in a more efficient way. In this context, the Financial Stability Forum and the International Monetary Fund are already intensifying their cooperation with a view to enhancing the assessment of financial stability risks on a global scale, while in the EU the same is valid for the Banking Supervision Committee and the Committee of European Banking Supervisors. These efforts should also be mirrored at the national and regional levels, through the intensification of the cooperation and exchange of information between central banks and supervisory authorities for an overall better monitoring and assessment of risks to the financial system. The other side of this coin relates to the issue of incorporating the outcome of the financial stability risk analysis into policy action in the field of supervision, which also needs to be reinforced.Second, in the area of crisis management and resolution: the global nature of financial markets and the increased interlinkages between markets and institutions requires competent financial authorities, central banks, supervisors and ministries of finance to strengthen their coordination mechanisms for the management of crisis involving cross-border financial institutions. In the EU, an important milestone has been reached with the Memorandum of Understanding signed by the competent authorities of all Member States in June 2008. This MoU establishes common principles, procedures and terminology to be used by all parties involved in a cross-border crisis.Third, in relation to liquidity provision: in order to maintain stable money markets, central banks would benefit from enhanced access to supervisory information, including liquidity stress-testing and contingency funding plans of banks. At the same time, supervisors would benefit from information available at central banks, such as banks’ bidding behaviour.Overall, while the need for enhanced interaction between central banks and supervisory authorities is widely acknowledged, recent events have called into question whether improved interaction in cooperation suffices. In this context, the debate has recently turned towards the future supervisory architecture. The financial crisis has underscored the urgency of reviewing the EU supervisory framework, which is still based on national responsibilities against the background of increased financial market integration and the growing role of large cross-border financial institutions. In the EU, a High Level Group was set up under the chairmanship of Mr Jacques de Larosiére with the mandate to examine the allocation of tasks between the national and the European level and submit proposals to strengthen European supervisory arrangements. The expectations regarding the recommendations of the Group, to be issued in February 2009, are high, and could encompass, among the possible options, a stronger role of central banks and the ECB in particular in EU supervision, thus recognising the crucial role central banks have currently played in fostering financial stability.The financial turmoil which began in the summer of 2007 has developed over time into one of the most disruptive crises that the world has experienced in many decades. This is why from the start of the turmoil public authorities – both in the euro area and in other parts of the world – have reacted with determination to prevent the turbulences from undermining financial stability and destabilising our economic systems. Despite the large range of actions undertaken by public authorities, key financial markets remain under stress and the banking sector must yet recover its strength and initiative, while each day brings us new reports of job losses and output cuts that provide only a partial and limited account of the strains and costs that the current crisis imposes on our societies.From the beginning of the crisis, we have put a premium on understanding how disturbances stemming from a relatively small segment of a market presumably linked to local and regional conditions (such as the US subprime mortgage market) could spread through continents and markets at such a rapid pace, undermining the strength of our economies and financial systems and, ultimately, giving rise to concerns about systemic stability. At the root of the crisis, we find a combination of macroeconomic imbalances and microeconomic factors, including market failures and deficiencies in the design of our regulatory and supervisory frameworks. Public authorities have reacted to the current crisis through a range of interventions in key fields, including liquidity management, monetary policy and fiscal policy. In addition, many initiatives have been undertaken to address weaknesses in the regulatory and supervisory framework in order to provide sounder foundations to our financial systems and, ultimately, to our economies and societies. Despite our best efforts, we cannot yet see the light at the end of the tunnel. However, it is fairly easy to predict that when we get out of the tunnel, the world will look different in many respects. I venture to say that, if we are able to draw the right lessons from the crisis, the world will not look only different, but also better. For this reason, it is crucial to increase our efforts to implement those urgent reforms, especially in the regulatory and supervisory frameworks, and to reassure the public that it can be confident of our determination to do whatever is necessary to preserve price stability and financial stability. Alessi, L. and C. Detken (2009). “ ‘Real time’ early warning indicators for costly asset price boom/bust cycles: A role for global liquidity”, presented at the EABCN and CREI Conference on Business Cycle Developments, Financial Fragility, Housing and Commodity Prices, Barcelona, 21-23 November 2008.Allen, F. and D. Gale (2005). “From cash-in-the-Market pricing to Financial Fragility,” Journal of the European Economic Association 3, pp. 535-546.Brunnermeier, M. and L Pedersen (2009). “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,” forthcoming in the Review of Financial Studies.Ashcraft, A. and T. Schuermann (2008). “Understanding the Securitization of Subprime Mortgage Credit”, Fed New York Staff Reports N. 318. Cassola, N., M. Drehmann, P. Hartmann, M. Lo Duca, and M. Scheicher (2008). “A Research Perspective on the Propagation of the Credit Market Turmoil,” Research Bulletin No. 6, June, European Central Bank.Committee on the Global Financial System (CGFS) (2008). “Central bank operations in response to the financial turmoil”, CGFS Publications No. 31. Cukierman, A. (2006). “Central bank finances and independence – How much capital should a central bank have? Forthcoming in The Capital Needs of Central Banks, M. Blejer and S. Milton (eds.), Bank of England Press.Heider, F., M. Hoerova, and C. Holthausen (2008). “Liquidity Hoarding and Interbank Market Spreads: The Role of Counterparty Risk”, presented at the 2008 UniCredit Conference on Banking and Finance, Vienna, 6-7 November.“Financial Stability Review,” European Central Bank, December 2007, June 2008, December 2008.“The Incentive Structure of the ‘Originate and Distribute’ Model,” European Central Bank, December 2008.Kashyap, A., R. Rajan, and J. Stein (2008). “The Global Roots of the Current Financial Crisis and its Implications for Regulation,” presented at the Fifth ECB Central Banking Conference.Obstfeld, M and K. Rogoff, 2002, Global implications of Self-Oriented National Monetary Rules, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 503-535Oudiz G. and J. Sachs, 1984, Macroeconomic Policy Coordination among Industrialized Countries, Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1-64.Rajan, R. (2005), “Has financial development made the world riskier?”, NBER WP 11728.Sufi A. and A. Mian (2008) The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the 2007 Mortgage Default Crisis.Trichet, J.C., 2005, Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy, Speech at the Mas Lecture, Singapore.Trichet, J.C., 2008, International Interdependencies and Monetary Policy: A Policy Maker’s view, Speech at the Fifth ECB Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt am Main.[1] I am grateful to R. Adalid, M. Blix, A. Consolo, M. Hoerova, K. Nikolaou, R. Peronaci, F. Pires, E. Rentzou, D. Rodríguez Palenzuela and S. Sauer, for inputs into this speech.[2] See CGFS (2008) and Cassola et al. (2008) for further details. The effects of asymmetric information and counterparty credit risk on the structure of the interbank market and various policy responses are analysed in Heider et al. (2008).[3] See Ashcraft and Schuermann, (2008), Rajan (2005) and Sufi and Mian (2008).[4] 14 with the Fed.[5] For illustration, one may adapt the Poole 1970-paradigm to liquidity management during a financial turmoil: when the demand for liquidity becomes unstable (different demand pattern), the central bank focuses on stabilising interest rates directly, rather than stabilising interest rates by managing the quantity (“excess” allotments above benchmark).[6] In order to keep the average supply of liquidity over the entire maintenance period unchanged the ECB conducted liquidity-absorbing fine tuning operations on the last day of the maintenance period.[7] From EUR 1 546 billion at end-July 2007 to EUR 2 500 billion at end-January 2009.[8] Currently, around 2100 credit institutions are eligible for Eurosystem’s open market operations, almost 2300 credit institutions can access the Eurosystem’s marginal lending facility.[9] See, among others, Obstfeld and Rogoff (2002), Oudizi and Sachs (1984) and Trichet (2008).[10] Please note that there were also capital injections outside government recapitalisation schemes (from BE, DE, FR, LU and NL), amounting to EUR 42 billion, which dealt with troubled institutions such as Fortis and Dexia.[11] See Cukierman (2006).[12] See the article “Ten years of the Stability and Growth Pact”, ECB Monthly Bulletin, October 2008.[13] Alessi L. and C. Detken (2009).[14] See also the April 2005 Monthly Bulletin article, Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy and Trichet (2005).Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur particip xvi meet public econom granada abl share analys reflect current financi crisi role public polici respond subject speech today deserv explan current experienc one deepest complex crise wit world mani decad root crisi find combin effect number market failur well regulatori failur explain turmoil stem relat small segment us mortgag market translat global crisi pose number challeng economi societi notion market regulatori failur heart public econom field current crisi also repres extraordinari exampl stabilis intern domest financi system invigor mediumterm requir continu demand cooper among differ public polici rang macroeconom liquidityrel regulatori supervisori polici structur intervent four part devot first part analys under caus contribut crisi later broad describ polici respons given major player global economi four differ angl liquid polici monetari polici fiscal polici regulatori reform third section discuss depth action undertaken central bank especi focus polici deploy ecb eurosystem rational well challeng ahead final last part would like make consider potenti new environ polici maker particular central bank may key legaci current crisi start financi crisi trigger summer realis risk associ us market subprim mortgag proper reflect price relat instrument particular mortgageback secur marketwid reassess financi risk led sharp increas premia spread across segment credit market rapid fall market valu credit instrument hit net worth profit bank system tension market credit instrument spread money market earli august give rise concern system disrupt inde interbank trade came almost halt august result combin except high uncertainti potenti direct exposur bank toxic asset increas demand liquid honour credit line commit socal conduit e banksponsor offbal sheet invest vehicl lack transpar extent exposur compound uncertainti prevent market particip distinguish good bank bad bank lead declin trade reallif version akerlof lemon market addit conduit becom time increas reliant issuanc shortterm paper fund securitis activ howev outbreak turmoil becam unabl rollov shortterm financ asset back commerci paper market amidst great uncertainti asset valuat background money market interest rate spread rose sharpli liquid dri prompt central bank interven largescal liquid inject year went fall us hous price acceler backdrop rise number foreclosur slowdown us economi led increas number default mortgag subprim mortgag also prime segment market thus increas number secur link mortgag turn much riskier previous thought major central bank around globe continu address market disrupt signific liquid inject howev loss sever import market financi asset continu mount march fed engin rescu bear stearn fifth largest u invest bank jp morgan grant direct access financ main invest bank first time sinc great depress financi turmoil deepen week follow collaps lehman brother midseptemb year onset crisi eventu develop fullblown crisi advers spillov real activ within two week bankruptci lehman brother mount loss subprim mortgag market led us largest insur compani aig largest save loan institut washington mutual seiz govern widespread concern solvenc financi institut ensu spread europ govern assist need avert collaps sever institut goe without say determin appropri polici respons crisi requir thorough understand under caus purpos import distinguish macroeconom factor microeconom natur macroeconom factor root current crisi may go far back late global imbal current account posit capit flow across major economi particular us start build time sever emerg economi enhanc fiscal disciplin record collaps invest contribut alongsid factor substanti surplus savingsinvest current account balanc industrialis countri corpor invest fell collaps bubbl meanwhil us privat save fall domest demand expand excess save world outsid us socal save glut togeth accommod global monetari condit led ampl liquid world financi market low interest rate across matur spectrum turn micro factor financi innov allow repackag mortgag tradit illiquid asset origin held local bank higheryield complex secur triplea rate mortgag back secur complex product base secur high demand bank investor around world search yield environ characteris low interest rate situat endur sustain appetit foreign investor debt secur issu us govern governmentsponsor agenc well corpor sector allow countri smooth financ current account deficit search yield foster demand complex form securitis led creation instrument entail risk difficult assess price activ secondari market exist mani new instrument associ opac credit risk distribut made difficult keep track exposur key question investor look close risk associ secur purchas therebi play disciplin role securitis process answer lead us import microeconom factor behind current crisi exist agenc problem associ implement origin distribut model model becam preval among larg bank past twenti year design deliv effici alloc distribut risk economi howev inform asymmetri friction origin distribut model practic gave rise ineffici outcom distort behaviour various parti involv securitis process investor rate agenc intermediari origin main reason goal parti involv differ instanc may even conflict besid differ categori fulli internalis consequ individu action overal process therefor right incent share inform effici particular investor becam overreli rate provid rate agenc often proper conduct due dilig fact regul gave rate promin role risk assess framework might indirect affect investor incent investor often ignor fact rate agenc risk measur offer partial account risk embed secur focus primarili expect loss take account tail loss distribut addit take liquid risk account moreov rate agenc subject potenti conflict interest may diminish incent undertak time downgrad structur product provid adequ inform investor regard analysi under rate decis fact rate paid issuer rate agenc may incent expand coverag product whose risk assess difficult potenti unreli order maximis revenu besid agenc may also provid commerci advic issuer secur request rate regard origin loan incent screen monitor borrow may reduc origin distribut model sold origin asset intermediari subsequ took care repackag secur instead loan origin may concentr expand volum loan origin boost profit diminish incent screen monitor borrow impli investor may ultim acquir asset relat lower qualiti perform compound fact ntermediari purchas asset bundl pool prior securitis focus maximis revenu stem servic fee charg investor without necessarili deliv riskreturn balanc desir investor general remuner scheme base reward shortterm profit tend predomin throughout financi system often detriment longerterm health financi institut exampl compens structur top manag level base comparison latest result visàvi peer thus tend encourag shortterm risktak manag keen avoid underperform pressur deliv quick profit make difficult risk manag depart often view parti spoiler curb excess risk take financi institut job risk manag also complic fact certain risk hard quantifi measur exampl tail risk common agre valuat model miss complex secur factor magnifi general procycl tendenc financi system also stem host factor account standard e g marktomarket account depend collater valu leverag ratio asset price structur incent problem fulli taken account regul supervisor basel framework preval time turmoil outbreak still underestim bank exposur captur bulk risk relat offbalancesheet vehicl well liquid reput risk supervisor regul also paid attent challeng regulatori arbitrag fact financi innov process trigger among consider order circumv exist regul particular capit requir aspect even press current environ larg complex financi institut oper across border differ nation regulatori supervisori regim mention improv closer cooper inform share among central bank regul supervisor nation intern level seem therefor essenti sum seen caus current crisi trace back macroeconom imbal micro level incent problem regulatori supervisori defici also play role nonetheless crisi shown import systemwid extern propag exacerb crisi problem individu bank may wide serious implic financi system economi whole overal bank must ultim respond loss riski asset rais new capit new equiti howev may difficult issu suffici amount short run consequ bank first respons asset fire sale scale back lend activ two effect affect bank system wide widespread liquid asset current market condit push price marktomarket account declin asset price lead unwarr contagion bank similar asset bank may forc adjust posit sell asset thus lead asset price declin similar decid cut lend bank may internalis repercuss decis real economi term foregon profit invest opportun output employ let turn public polici respons crisi special emphasi common element respons major player global economi central bank establish first line polici defenc advers dynam set motion financi crisi particular massiv provis liquid although specif respons vari across central bank sinc august common object institut address global liquid squeez particular order mitig much possibl risk protract liquid shortag turn solvenc problem central bank liquid polici limit shortest end money market rate case also sought eas pressur term fund market pursu increas suppli longerterm fund access central bank fund also facilit enlarg list collater elig central bank lend oper widen rang counterparti access oper countri central bank also extend lend nondepositari bank nonbank financi institut addit central bank establish secur lend facil improv function interbank repo market import characterist global liquid polici respons financi crisi strengthen cooper among central bank cooper taken place first enhanc inform share collect monitor market develop later take coordin step eas liquid tension global money market first initi direct agreement decemb ecb us feder reserv grant loan us dollar euro area counterparti connect fed term auction facil taf us dollardenomin loan euro area bank financ currenc arrang swap line two central bank us dollar liquidityprovid bilater agreement fed ecb well fed grow number central bank taf programm becom symbol determin central bank communiti address global liquid tension signific expand time term scale addit eurosystem sign agreement central bank sever european countri order improv provis euro liquid bank sector final fortun limit number case central bank assist domest govern provid emerg liquid assist institut stress let quick review common element measur taken central bank perspect monetari polici distinct liquid manag monetari polici import case ecb sinc strategi clear separ role monetari polici determin optim interest rate level requir maintain price stabil role oper framework ensur interest rate decis transmit financi market real economi effect manner although differ pace reflect differ domest macroeconom condit specif monetari polici object start crisi major central bank around world also adjust respect monetari polici stanc reflect diminish risk price stabil institut clear signal strong commit intern central bank communiti anchor inflat expect address macroeconom background implic financi crisi fiscal side govern around world announc number initi order tackl effect financi crisi natur fiscal measur evolv develop financi crisi propag real economi govern intervent initi focus address problem singl institut main rescu provis guarante govern also announc measur provid relief struggl homeown attempt stimul domest economi particular countri slowdown hous market signific next financi turmoil intensifi need support entir financi system becam clearer fiscal respons europ us evolv comprehens plan design support entir domest financi industri rather individu institut plan typic compris capit inject exchang equiti systemat provis state guarante final stimulus packag aim foster aggreg demand also announc advers effect crisi work real economi parallel increas scope fiscal measur also rise degre intern polici coordin reflect global natur amplitud current crisi g g summit repres major step polici coordin global level eu level intern cooper shape except procedur european commiss coordin acceler nation rescu plan well european econom recoveri plan plan provid common framework effort made member state eu view ensur consist maximis effect alway accord within framework stabil growth pact addit type fiscal measur current work econom crisi deepen signific contribut fiscal adjust may come socal automat stabilis programm link social secur unemploy benefit general comprehens europ us act immedi proportion depth busi cycl automat stabilis time target discretionari polici suffer polit economi risk undermin effect discretionari measur volum public resourc made avail commit govern preced context fiscal author forget sustain public financ precondit effect extraordinari measur fiscal stimulus packag adopt recent europ rais concern adopt countri fiscal situat alreadi call particular prudenc regard sustain govern around world especi countri presenc automat stabilis signific import take prospect burden stabilis account design overal fiscal plan regard regulatori reform compet author european global level activ involv develop measur aim restor market confid enhanc stabil financi system european level polici action guid ecofin roadmap identifi four prioriti area enhanc transpar improv valuat standard reinforc prudenti rule risk manag improv market function prioriti mirror intern level financi stabil forum propos april consist set recommend subsequ endors g minist central bank governor recal financi stabil forum bring togeth central bank bank supervisor financ ministri largest world economi forum also involv intern institut intern monetari fund bank intern settlement recognit global dimens current financi crisi g financ minist central bank governor acknowledg novemb meet last year need expand fsf membership includ also key emerg market economi expect contribut enhanc fsf abil coordin global effort toward resili financi system central bank act three differ front tackl crisi name liquid manag monetari polici financi stabil next minut would like share reflect polici action central bank general ecb particular undertaken challeng like face three area discuss liquid manag intervent use recal ecb measur provid support money market base fundament principl separ monetari polici decis implement principl import order reduc risk econom agent may mistaken interpret volatil shortterm money market rate trigger temporari unpredict fluctuat liquid condit contain inform desir monetari polici stanc instead given rate appli main refinanc oper separ principl prove particular effect financi market turmoil time high volatil shortterm money market rate let tri explain somewhat greater detail rational behind oper measur eurosystem financi market turmoil start turmoil collaps lehman brother midseptemb ecb engag activ liquid manag adjust tempor quantit distribut liquid provis within mainten period besid octob eurosystem engag increas intern cooper eas tension global money market particular facilit access euro area bank us dollar liquid adjust euro oper ecb respond perceiv chang pattern bank demand liquid mainten period particular respond increas evid interest rate longer necessarili link liquid condit last day mainten period postul socal martingal hypothesi inde unlik normal time bank seem longer regard reserv hold differ day mainten period substitut contrast evid emerg precautionari demand liquid earli mainten period mention earlier shift time pattern liquid demand relat fact counterparti reluct lend unsecur term also fear confront unexpect liquid shock consequ bank seem prefer reduc socal liquid gap also fulfil reserv requir relat earli mainten period rise precautionari demand impli price liquid inconsist martingal hypothesi prompt ecb bring suppli liquid forward mainten period e frontload order achiev level short term interest rate concret ecb accommod bank prefer frontload reserv systemat allot socal benchmark amount week main refinanc oper allot benchmark reduc cours mainten period averag suppli liquid entir mainten period remain unchang vein ecb increas amount refinanc provid via longerterm refinanc oper view reduc liquid gap bank system smooth condit term money market correspond reduc amount allot week main refinanc oper total amount outstand liquid suppli remain unchang inde earli phase turmoil eurosystem aim keep overal level euro refinanc provid bank sector level close prevail turmoil line longstand polici provid bank system amount liquid need smooth fulfil aggreg liquid deficit mainten period eurosystem intermedi role support affect segment euro money market therefor main achiev adjust modal liquid suppli oper follow collaps lehman brother septemb last year financi market turmoil enter intens disrupt phase money market becam larg extent dysfunct respons deterior market condit eurosystem step temporari intermedi activ ensur dysfunct money market drive solvent bank busi various measur implement perhap import switch fixedr tender procedur full allot refinanc oper euro credit oper matur week month also ecb us dollar oper matur week month temporarili enlarg set collater practic measur impli ecb counterparti repres larg number euro area credit institut borrow much euro us dollar liquid wish week key term matur larger usual set elig asset result amount euro refinanc provid eurosystem collateralis dollar oper euro us dollar current close eur billion overal ecb liquid measur recent phase turmoil focuss address liquid shortfal interbank market could address problem heighten counterparti creditrisk avers situat euro money market still far normal still signific affect elev level risk avers inform asymmetri eurosystem move situat start turmoil provid refinanc bank system need satisfi aggreg liquid need aris autonom factor reserv requir present situat effect intermedi liquid flow among individu bank therefor clear intrabank liquid flow larg extent move dysfunct money market eurosystem balanc sheet reflect increas role play financi intermedi eurosystem consolid balanc sheet week financi statement increas around sinc start turmoil take signific intermedi role guarante order function economi certain essenti wake collaps lehman brother unpreced deterior degre public confid bank sector develop economi seem undermin fundament manner abil bank perform institut financi intermedi function forgotten euro area financi landscap signific chang recent decad result number structur develop includ introduct euro still predomin bankbas result dysfunct bank system relat larger potenti caus disrupt economi euro area region world cours take extens intermedi role accept longterm marketori economi like euro area increas intermedi role eurosystem temporari answer dysfunct money market without potenti disadvantag includ disincent bank resum normal trade activ also potenti increas financi risk eurosystem nevertheless mitig adequ risk control measur thus eurosystem determin continu support bank system enhanc liquid polici long need also look forward reactiv interbank lend bank resum tradit intermedi activ inde exit strategi except temporari measur undertaken support bank sector consid conjunct progress restor normal condit money market meantim bank must show willing reestablish credit line destigmatis interbank borrow regard clear financi market turmoil must necessarili impli adjust bank risk manag seem current conserv behaviour individu bank characteris strong reduct credit line littl appetit actual assess price credit risk even shortest segment money market longterm interest bank system financi intermedi euro area tradit larg extent conduct via bank system rather via capit market unlik us anglosaxon countri differ relat import bank system capit market may explain larg extent cours current crisi eurosystem effort focus provid support tradit bank central bank fed also extend support financi institut sinc incept euro eurosystem oper framework grant access eurosystem credit oper larg number counterparti via margin lend facil open market oper counterparti elig criteria defin general term wide rang depositori institut includ small save bank cooper bank direct access central bank liquid combin larg list counterparti similar wide rang asset elig collater recent expand temporari basi proven use turbul sinc allow eurosystem reach larg number financi intermediari time shortterm interbank market function proper financi crisi radic chang environ monetari polici make rise oil commod price generat concern upsid risk price stabil recent year sudden stop cours materialis downsid risk growth declin inflationari pressur larg due fall commod price effect deepen financi crisi spread real economi led signific reduct upsid risk price stabil today perspect great moder era remark macroeconom perform start mid appear surpris remot monetari polici maker adapt quick present macroeconom financi environ best characteris concept nonmeasur risk knightian uncertainti know economist frank knight develop distinct risk probabl assign uncertainti even probabl unknown sharp increas uncertainti typic period financi instabl immedi consequ risk premia lead strong prefer safe liquid asset allow focus second evolut risk premia implic conduct monetari polici recent period sinc begin financi turmoil summer financi market gone dramat process gradual revalu repric risk us euro area also across world follow bankruptci lehman brother septemb deterior financi market acceler investor loss risk appetit well reassess credit liquid risk reflect signific rise credit cds spread phenomenon particular affect firm lower rate financi sector sector turbul period face substanti impair transmiss polici rate money market evid strong increas spread euribor rate indic rate unsecur lend among bank correspond euro overnight index swap rate eonia swap rate compar level prevail turmoil develop reflect reluct bank lend close relat general lack transpar mention earlier magnitud exposur individu bank carri book transmiss monetari polici decis shortterm money market first step along transmiss mechan decis subsequ pass bank lend rate repres one key channel monetari polici affect economi know reflect contractu arrang bank practic mani countri varieti bank lend interest rate tend adjust line threemonth euribor rather polici rate impli borrow cost household firm increas consider octob also relat polici rate recent bank interest rate start decreas substanti reflect lower polici money market rate start octob result continu decreas euribor rate expect reduct bank lend rate also observ sign eas condit risk premia financi market end look particular monetari polici reaction crisi size cumul interest rate reduct especi sinc coordin interestr cut octob five major central bank bank canada bank england feder reserv sverig riksbank swiss nation bank except left polici rate central bank histor low level environ devoid challeng monetari polici quit obvious central bank keep cut rate sooner later hit lower bound howev alon necessarili impli end monetari polici effect channel may remain avail central bank addit stimul economi order achiev monetari polici object central bank instanc chang size andor composit balanc sheet two categori unconvent measur nowaday common refer quantit qualit eas respect channel specif commit technolog central bank might influenc term credit risk premia thus shape yield curv cost fund privat sector even shortterm nomin interest rate constrain lower bound respect crucial tri make virtu necess dramat unconvent measur entail nontrivi risk impact subject high degre uncertainti import stress precondit radic unconvent quantit eas measur e g largescal purchas govern bond central bank standard interest rate polici could defin convent quantit eas measur e g provis support bank sector economi larg expand liquid provis inclus collater polici deem insuffici ensur credibl anchor price stabil discuss section embark unconvent measur central bank like fulli use polici rate instrument also exhaust option exist toolbox order preserv price stabil cours success outcom dramat unconvent action depend sound communic public exist clear credibl commit central bank respect achiev monetari polici object welldefin definit price stabil case ecb central bank must explain reason mechan unconvent monetari polici channel oper crucial import public receiv wrong impress central powerless face deflationari pressur environ extrem low nomin interest rate contrast public must convinc central bank take necessari action prevent entrench unaccept deviat monetari polici object privat sector expect said environ zero almost zero interest rate may bring polici challeng go beyond strict effect monetari polici exampl environ interbank money market like disrupt japanes experi demonstr institut money market fund may put threat monetari polici could still effect impair money market serious consequ privat financi intermedi eventu pose difficulti transmiss monetari polici optim asset alloc within economi well risk financi stabil addit challeng central bank concern lower rate go difficult might becom revers polici thus make like today monetari polici may compromis futur price stabil financi stabil experi eurosystem clear remind pressur central bank face decid start remov polici accommod move differ subject let recal adjust ecb polici rate start coordin move five major central bank bank canada bank england feder reserv sverig riksbank swiss nation bank octob coordin interest rate cut unpreced histor standard much welcom sign strong commit intern central bank communiti address macroeconom implic financi market turmoil also gave rise question whether financi crisi may usher new era global natur challeng face central bank requir increas intern monetari polici coordin econom literatur polici coordin suggest normal condit intern integr good servic market provid relat high degre risk pool make mechan formal polici coordin less necessari conclus deriv fact rulebas polici fund common principl mediumterm orient anchor expect confid symmetr stabilis domest condit bring stabl global condit well financi crisi howev shown polici coordin import benefit cooper increas integr world economi advers shock one market confin nation border rather propag global rapid pace inde coordin rate cut natur except cooper differ area among world major central bank proven effect polici respons global domest challeng support confid time heighten uncertainti explain current crisi cooper among central bank pursu two main direct enhanc inform exchang collect monitor market develop coordin step provid liquid third front central bank polici action let discuss measur taken financi stabil field contribut financi stabil one core respons assign ec treati ecb pursu primari object maintain price stabil contribut smooth function money market ecb prevent unnecessari volatil introduc econom activ financi market thus provid import contribut safeguard financi stabil euro area particular time crisi like present addit central bank cours includ ecb activ particip wide rang intern committe fora entrust task restor market function enhanc resili financi system prioriti given restor market confid context initi design strengthen transpar valuat standard singl pivot particular improv warrant disclosur standard financi institut exposur structur product well practic follow valuat respect mani larg global bank consist appli disclosur methodolog set fsf report hold complex illiquid instrument thus demonstr willing privat sector contribut strengthen market confid furthermor guidanc provid basel committe bank supervis assess bank fair valu practic financi instrument vein intern account standard board intensifi work enhanc account disclosur standard offbal sheet entiti releas draft guidanc fair valu measur market becom inact central bank well bank supervisor contribut work particip relat expert advisori panel furthermor ecb also member newlycr financi crisi advisori group whose primari role advis intern account standard board iasb us financi account standard board fasb standardset implic global financi crisi potenti chang global regulatori environ aforement measur signific improv inform avail market investor compet author failur lehman brother last septemb generat unpreced deterior degre confid bank sector trigger coordin action govern context european head state adopt set common principl aim address financi turmoil ensur design nation stabilis measur lead negat spillov effect across countri eu common principl endors european council octob laid common featur grant guarante new issuanc bank debt recapitalis measur adopt member state govern council ecb contribut work propos recommend encompass provis govern guarante bank debt recapitalis measur first govern council ecb propos set recommend framework grant govern guarante identifi follow main object measur address fund problem solvent bank safeguard levelplay field among financi institut order avoid market distort ensur consist oper framework eurosystem avoid impair implement singl monetari polici furthermor recommend includ price system govern guarante bank debt eu govern agre provid guarante new mediumterm bank senior debt year scheme expir decemb bank begun make use measur begin outstand volum govern guarante unsecur bank bond amount eur billion euro area eur billion eu bank indic intent issu similar bond note issuanc far oversubscrib spread govern guarante bond lower secur bond countri compar matur second regard recapitalis measur govern council ecb also provid recommend main aim measur improv function stabil bank system foster adequ flow credit economi provid tier capit fundament sound institut would carri acquir equiti form ordinari share prefer share hybrid instrument subordin debt total commit regard recapitalis scheme reach eur billion decemb also regard govern council ecb propos methodolog benchmark price state recapitalis measur fundament sound institut euro area recommend without prejudic guidanc european commiss aim avoid undu distort competit accord state aid rule treati price system propos govern council ecb consid recapitalis take consider specif market situat institut distinguish particular fundament sound distress bank base premis provid requir rate return captur price corridor vari depend type instrument lower band corridor appli instrument featur similar subordin debt higher band featur similar ordinari share also recommend temporari natur recapitalis measur ensur provid financi institut incent redeem instrument price system revis period reflect possibl chang market condit overal fulli confid action taken central bank nation govern provid appropri respons challeng rais recent event still restor market function return normal market condit ultim depend bank sector context reactiv interbank market ensur proper financ economi utmost import delv under caus current situat discuss various polici respons announc implement differ compet author envisag challeng ahead especi area partial exclus compet central bank look forward current crisi like bring import chang futur econom financi system live includ revis regulatori supervisori domain reform intern financi architectur well chang natur relationship coordin among differ polici public author therefor like wit number institut chang like bring new environ polici make number area includ sever aspect relat central bank last part intervent would like share thought potenti new environ sinc august central bank respond varieti way financi market disrupt reflect differ extent market hit turbul differ design oper framework howev general major central bank step intermedi role view address liquid squeez show certain degre converg oper procedur particular central bank pursu activ reserv manag reassur bank order access overnight fund increas frequenc oper increas suppli fund notabl longterm expand vari degre definit collater accept collateralis lend oper provid access collateralis lend larg number counterparti adapt tender procedur open market oper direct price rather quantitybas scheme akin use stand facil turbul develop central bank strengthen cooper enhanc communic collect market monitor coordin action provid liquid respect signific number intercentr bank swap line set facilit distribut foreign currenc liquid domest counterparti overal one lesson draw turmoil certain key oper featur facilit implement monetari polici stress particular central bank better posit distribut reserv effect interbank lend impair capabl provid access collateralis lend oper larg scale wide set counterparti broad rang collater yet import issu clear answer much whether rather converg understand optim featur oper framework stress reflect design oper framework steadi state need particular develop better understand optim mix privat market central bank intermedi need care liais supervisori bodi clarifi say optim context mean uniform extent monetari polici strategi central bank status visàvi govern certain specif featur domest financi system persist optim liquid framework countri monetari union reflect countri areaspecif factor previous section discuss issu come fore current crisi provis central bank liquid financi institut bank addit issu come last month concern extent central bank may engag direct lend real economi pure theoret subject central bank confer recent establish feder reserv system sever liquid facil direct non bank show instanc support direct money market fund issuer commerci paper principl scope direct lend central bank real economi depend extent malfunct money credit market distort bank lend prevent aggreg household busi obtain credit sens central bank decid bypass bank system start lend household firm direct sake preserv order function economi practic even abstract possibl legal constraint e monetari financ state sever issu central bank must ponder decid appropri economi provid direct financ real sector stress term one case uniqu answer whether central bank engag direct lend much depend number consider refer structur featur economi graviti crisi state financi system number institut factor notabl govern relationship central bank govern instanc one appar straightforward observ need provid direct credit economi time dysfunct bank activ like depend relat import bank sector financi intermedi follow argument one may argu bankbas economi may relat less need provid credit agent bank marketbas economi inde focus provid support bank sector central bank may increas chanc sustain economi whole howev extrem circumst notabl bank sector reneg institut role main engin financi intermedi central bank may reach opposit conclus exact bank sector predomin financi intermedi dysfunct state might prompt central bank interven entir economi come halt central bank need decid sector target easi choic may impli need central bank take decis optim alloc resourc economi histor experi show better left privat sector concern may relat risk polit pressur govern interfer especi case scale financ programm requir support treasuri financ ensur expans central bank liabil may give rise general concern fiscal cost action taken monetari author final relat previous argument direct lend real economi may impli increas financi risk taken central bank potenti expos latter risk financi independ ultim institut independ purpos remark certain suggest central bank abstain direct lend real sector rather point number aspect consid mani complex central bank would ever take decis light heart embark polici central bank may prefer pursu maximum extent opportun provid oper framework provid indirect support e use bank sector intermediari real economi one practic way provid indirect support privat sector pursu eurosystem liquid oper collater framework inde provid bank unlimit access fix rate refinanc oper accept wide rang privat paper collater eurosystem effect support provis credit real economi seen polici respons global european level characteris increas degre coordin natur question therefor seem whether look forward polici coordin level eueuro area warrant given exist singl currenc euro area first focus coordin among nation fiscal polici fiscal side key challeng futur prevent financi crisi eventu undermin sustain credibl public financ prevent happen point let reiter stabil growth pact alreadi provid coordin devic fiscal polici especi provid peer pressur mechan sound sustain public financ provid appropri framework conduct coordin fiscal polici good time also bad time challeng time crisi thus use exist mechan best effect put rather blunt tinker keel wind strong pact alreadi flexibl enough allow room polici adjust without undermin foundat sustain path inde eu countri alreadi face consider longterm challeng cost associ popul age born mind consid short term demand polici start posit less strong inappropri shortterm respons may make us liter age faster expos even strong need adjust cope longterm challeng countri larg deficit andor debt level may particular vulner regard unfortun mani euro area countri enter financi crisi econom downturn unnecessarili weak fiscal balanc miss opportun present past year revenu windfal consolid budget never popular messag even normal time still deserv mention mistak avoid crisi pass inde one fiscal polici error prior includ mistaken interpret budgetari improv good time evid structur improv often use motiv spend increas tax cut posit note note complianc stabil growth pact first ten year somewhat uneven eu overal fiscal perform term avoid high budget deficit buildup govern debt much better decad preced pact inde eu countri compli stabil growth pact take advantag relat larg automat stabilis much work accomplish guid beacon ahead sound fiscal polici strong keel provid basi stabil necessari condit good longterm growth challeng sea ahead one addit dimens polici coordin euro area singl monetari polici nation fiscal polici member state respect institut setup european monetari union consist clear effici assign object instrument differ author togeth strict divis respons ecb must focus primari mandat deliv medium term price stabil condit full independ fiscal polici must focus tradit object relat alloc redistribut stabilis vari extent contribut maintain environ macroeconom stabil cours set monetari polici ecb take account fiscal polici stanc one factor contribut outlook price stabil medium term goe without say open exchang view inform among differ author welcom enhanc common understand desir object strategi pursu howev cannot scope activ coordin fiscal monetari polici inde commit ex ant coordin fiscal monetari polici may blur respons various author expens account may ultim reduc incent pursu object thus current macroeconom polici framework euro area base separ respons appropri ensur sustain noninflationari econom growth cooper field liquid manag unpreced scale certain one hallmark public respons current turmoil anoth exampl without preced central bank coordin decis ecb five major central bank eas global monetari condit octob comment observ wonder whether concert polici decis may begin new era increas intern monetari polici coordin respons econom financi globalis import stress coordin interest rate cut taken specif context specif object extraordinari uncertainti time econom outlook strong evid upsid risk price stabil diminish global level coordin cut address need respond common shock transmit around globe almost simultan joint communic intern central bank communiti provid signal strong commit respond macroeconom implic financi market turmoil doubt past three decad trade econom financi linkag among differ region work grown tighter cours policymak take account design polici howev talk intern polici coordin import defin clear mean polici coordin mean cours central bank need adopt polici stanc entir world certain cannot surrog domest macroeconom prudenc weaken commit central bank institut object inde differ cyclic posit structur economi e g term market rigid friction sector leverag financi system etc monetari polici institut framework well shock hit economi almost necessarili lead differ decid appropri monetari polici stanc thus systemat monetari polici coordin may eventu come cost weaken central bank commit institut object intern polici coordin better understood continu cooper exchang inform staff decisionmak level share experienc mutual understand trust much lie consensus among central bank monetari polici gear toward domest price stabil sound public financ flexibl econom structur creat condit longterm econom growth financi stabil anoth interest debat gain obvious reason renew interest strength past year role asset price take monetari polici design inde experienc present larg volatil asset price jeopardis stabil financi system potenti undermin macroeconom stabil repetit boombust cycl potenti high cost macroeconom stabil associ typic abrupt revers excess valuat asset beg question monetari polici give weight asset price learn asset price bubbl monetari polici know bubbl extrem difficult identifi real time given assess whether asset price driven fundament surround uncertainti perhap even sometim uncertainti knigthian sens central bank refrain target asset price moreov monetari polici action influenc asset price develop magnitud swing polici rate would need curb boom bust cycl asset price could advers implic macroeconom stabil short term base conclus broad share central bank academ communiti one option noth bubbl burst eas monetari polici aggress provid support bank system economi socal mop approach downsid strategi cours risk creat moral hazard possibl altern approach suggest consist lean wind accord approach central bank conduct slight tighter monetari polici warrant pricest object buildup potenti detriment asset price boom identifi central bank would buy insur risk harm asset boombust cycl potenti cost term macroeconom financi stabil main argument approach premium stem polici framework may excess high fact polici respons asset price increas may end destabilis economi asset price revalu driven fundament risk relat difficulti mention concern identif asset price misalign real time risk howev act perfect alibi justifi polici inact recent literatur earli indic start research bis show differ indic help polici maker figur natur consequ revers phase extraordinari asset price develop therebi defin need polici action overal high cost current financi crisi seem provid support case flexibl lean wind strategi one implement polici practic would like stress ecb twopillar monetari polici strategi well suit cope challeng brought asset price develop close link monetari credit develop evolv imbal asset credit market exploit link monetari analysi consist comprehens assess liquid situat may provid earli inform develop asset price imbal therefor allow time respons impli risk price financi stabil thus ecb twopillar strategi may repres practic way mimick lean wind approach recent financi market crisi also highlight import role ecb central bank play safeguard financi stabil need increas interact central bank bank supervisor need increas interact also identifi financi stabil forum one recommend would support enhanc central bank role financi stabil assess crisi manag resolut liquid provis first regard financi stabil assess central bank benefit extend access supervisori inform especi relat system relev institut order identifi risk vulner financi system whole effici way context financi stabil forum intern monetari fund alreadi intensifi cooper view enhanc assess financi stabil risk global scale eu valid bank supervis committe committe european bank supervisor effort also mirror nation region level intensif cooper exchang inform central bank supervisori author overal better monitor assess risk financi system side coin relat issu incorpor outcom financi stabil risk analysi polici action field supervis also need reinforc second area crisi manag resolut global natur financi market increas interlinkag market institut requir compet financi author central bank supervisor ministri financ strengthen coordin mechan manag crisi involv crossbord financi institut eu import mileston reach memorandum understand sign compet author member state june mou establish common principl procedur terminolog use parti involv crossbord crisi third relat liquid provis order maintain stabl money market central bank would benefit enhanc access supervisori inform includ liquid stresstest conting fund plan bank time supervisor would benefit inform avail central bank bank bid behaviour overal need enhanc interact central bank supervisori author wide acknowledg recent event call question whether improv interact cooper suffic context debat recent turn toward futur supervisori architectur financi crisi underscor urgenc review eu supervisori framework still base nation respons background increas financi market integr grow role larg crossbord financi institut eu high level group set chairmanship mr jacqu de larosiér mandat examin alloc task nation european level submit propos strengthen european supervisori arrang expect regard recommend group issu februari high could encompass among possibl option stronger role central bank ecb particular eu supervis thus recognis crucial role central bank current play foster financi stabil financi turmoil began summer develop time one disrupt crise world experienc mani decad start turmoil public author euro area part world react determin prevent turbul undermin financi stabil destabilis econom system despit larg rang action undertaken public author key financi market remain stress bank sector must yet recov strength initi day bring us new report job loss output cut provid partial limit account strain cost current crisi impos societi begin crisi put premium understand disturb stem relat small segment market presum link local region condit us subprim mortgag market could spread contin market rapid pace undermin strength economi financi system ultim give rise concern system stabil root crisi find combin macroeconom imbal microeconom factor includ market failur defici design regulatori supervisori framework public author react current crisi rang intervent key field includ liquid manag monetari polici fiscal polici addit mani initi undertaken address weak regulatori supervisori framework order provid sounder foundat financi system ultim economi societi despit best effort cannot yet see light end tunnel howev fair easi predict get tunnel world look differ mani respect ventur say abl draw right lesson crisi world look differ also better reason crucial increas effort implement urgent reform especi regulatori supervisori framework reassur public confid determin whatev necessari preserv price stabil financi stabil alessi l c detken real time earli warn indic cost asset price boombust cycl role global liquid present eabcn crei confer busi cycl develop financi fragil hous commod price barcelona novemb allen f d gale cashinthemarket price financi fragil journal european econom associ pp brunnermei m l pedersen market liquid fund liquid forthcom review financi studi ashcraft schuermann understand securit subprim mortgag credit fed new york staff report n cassola n m drehmann p hartmann m lo duca m scheicher research perspect propag credit market turmoil research bulletin june european central bank committe global financi system cgfs central bank oper respons financi turmoil cgfs public cukierman central bank financ independ much capit central bank forthcom capit need central bank m blejer milton ed bank england press heider f m hoerova c holthausen liquid hoard interbank market spread role counterparti risk present unicredit confer bank financ vienna novemb financi stabil review european central bank decemb june decemb incent structur origin distribut model european central bank decemb kashyap r rajan j stein global root current financi crisi implic regul present fifth ecb central bank confer obstfeld m k rogoff global implic selfori nation monetari rule quarter journal econom oudiz g j sach macroeconom polici coordin among industri countri brook paper econom activ rajan r financi develop made world riskier nber wp sufi mian consequ mortgag credit expans evid mortgag default crisi trichet j c asset price bubbl monetari polici speech mas lectur singapor trichet j c intern interdepend monetari polici polici maker view speech fifth ecb central bank confer frankfurt main grate r adalid m blix consolo m hoerova k nikolaou r peronaci f pire e rentzou d rodríguez palenzuela sauer input speech see cgfs cassola et al detail effect asymmetr inform counterparti credit risk structur interbank market various polici respons analys heider et al see ashcraft schuermann rajan sufi mian fed illustr one may adapt pool paradigm liquid manag financi turmoil demand liquid becom unstabl differ demand pattern central bank focus stabilis interest rate direct rather stabilis interest rate manag quantiti excess allot benchmark order keep averag suppli liquid entir mainten period unchang ecb conduct liquidityabsorb fine tune oper last day mainten period eur billion endjuli eur billion endjanuari current around credit institut elig eurosystem open market oper almost credit institut access eurosystem margin lend facil see among other obstfeld rogoff oudizi sach trichet pleas note also capit inject outsid govern recapitalis scheme de fr lu nl amount eur billion dealt troubl institut forti dexia see cukierman see articl ten year stabil growth pact ecb month bulletin octob alessi l c detken see also april month bulletin articl asset price bubbl monetari polici trichet reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en