"Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Beyond the turmoil: rules, supervision and infrastructures",15-06-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,2903,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,It is a great pleasure for me to participate in the opening discussion at this conference. The organisers, in choosing the title of the panel, have given us the challenging task to look beyond the current turmoil surrounding rules, supervision and infrastructures. This is certainly not easy as we cannot yet speak of an end to the difficult period facing both the financial and real sectors of the economy. However, looking beyond the turmoil and start implementing the lessons we have learned is exactly what is needed at this point in time. Against the background of the crisis up until now, we have to draw the right conclusions and begin designing the future of the financial architecture, including new rules and improved supervision and oversight. This needs to be done now before the window of opportunity – which will not remain open forever – closes. However, before looking beyond the turmoil let me take the opportunity first to examine the performance of market infrastructures in the current crisis. Developments in the financial markets and the fate of specific institutions have been at the heart of the public debate. However, owing to the close interdependencies between financial markets, intermediaries and infrastructures, the difficulties affecting institutions and markets have also had a knock-on effect on market infrastructures, putting the functioning of payment systems, central counterparties and securities settlement systems under a real-life stress test. Fortunately, as I will illustrate in a moment, EU market infrastructures have proven to be remarkably resilient, thereby limiting the overall systemic risk. In the main this has been due to the successful interaction between industry, regulators and overseers, just like – if I may – in the Italian banking sector, which has also shown itself to be remarkably resilient in the current circumstances. In the second part of my intervention, I would indeed like to look beyond the current turmoil. I will – despite the very positive overall assessment for infrastructures – point to three areas that warrant particular attention for the future of market infrastructures. The first of these is the enhancement of overall crisis management arrangements for market infrastructures. The second involves strengthening market infrastructures for OTC derivatives. And third, given the importance of retail markets to the overall stability and efficiency of the financial system, there is the need to complete the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA).The financial market turmoil has impacted on EU payment systems, central counterparties (CCPs) and securities settlement systems mainly through intensified and more volatile market activity. We have also seen some peaks in transaction volumes as well as more frequent and higher margin calls. Furthermore, many infrastructures have had to cope with the default of a major participant, notably in the context of the demise of Lehman Brothers in September 2008 and the corresponding spill-over effects on its subsidiaries. Fortunately, EU market infrastructures were able effectively to overcome these challenges without any major operational disruptions. In particular, the Eurosystem’s TARGET system – which is not only the backbone of the large-value payment infrastructure for the euro, but also plays a central role in providing settlement services for 36 retail payment systems and 33 securities settlement systems that are connected as ancillary systems – has proven to be stable and resilient. Nonetheless, I would like to mention three key stylised facts which illustrate the impact of the current turmoil: First, the values processed in TARGET in the last quarter of 2008 showed an unusually high increase of 13% compared to the first three quarters (see Chart 1). When looking at the average values settled in different time bands during the day, the main difference between the third and the fourth quarter of 2008 relates to the values settled in the last hour of operations. This reflects the strong increase in overnight deposits made by banks with national central banks as a consequence of the switch to the full allotment fixed rate tenders in the ECB’s open market operations, following the intensification of the crisis after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. Second, not surprisingly from September 2008 onwards, we see a remarkable increase in the number of sender limits along with a decrease in their value (see Chart 2). Nonetheless, these changes had a marginal impact on the smooth flow of transactions and did not cause delays to the timely submission of payments. Third, the level of non-settled payments remained fairly stable in the second half of 2008, amounting to just 1% or so of the total daily average value settled in the system (see Chart 3), indicating the overall resilience of the TARGET system in the face of the financial turmoil. Crucially, market infrastructures continued to function robustly. In particular, by providing stable networks despite the highly disruptive conditions in financial markets, market infrastructures played an important shock-absorbing role and helped to maintain overall public confidence in the financial system. Since central banking overseers and financial regulators recognised long ago the critical importance of the reliable functioning of market infrastructures for overall financial stability and efficiency, they took action together with the service providers. Stringent requirements ensure that EU infrastructures are adequately designed, effectively manage their risks, and operate efficiently and reliably, both under normal circumstances and at times of crisis. Recent experiences suggest that these measures were well-targeted. Nevertheless, some areas for further improvement have also been identified. I shall now mention a few key areas for further action. As stated, I would like to focus on three areas: firstly, improvements related to the overall crisis management arrangements; secondly, the strengthening of market infrastructures for over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives; and thirdly, efforts geared to producing a more integrated retail payments infrastructure.One priority that relates to the overall crisis management arrangements is to further improve notification procedures, particularly regarding the communication of insolvencies by public authorities and infrastructure providers to market participants. Although this has generally worked well during the current turmoil, some measures are in progress to foster the exchange of standardised information. In addition, further measures are needed to ensure close cooperation with the authorities regarding the relationship with the defaulting participant and the coordination of measures to limit the impact of the default. Moreover, it might be an advantage if infrastructures were able to end unilaterally the contractual relationship with the participant (without waiting for the final decision by the relevant judicial or administrative authority).Furthermore, the current turmoil has reminded us that default rules need to be not only sufficiently clear and comprehensive for the infrastructure participant, but also that they should not cause any conflict between infrastructures. Therefore, as infrastructures are becoming increasingly interlinked, more coordination in the implementation of the default rules is vital for further mitigating risks at the systemic level.Finally, the default of Lehman Brothers was a major showcase for the severe implications of “institution-based interdependencies” between two or more infrastructures resulting from the exposures of major financial institutions participating in each of these infrastructures. Therefore, it is crucial for us to continue closely monitoring the interdependencies between individual institutions in order to assess their impact on the stability of the infrastructure.Let me now turn to the need to strengthen the infrastructure for OTC derivatives. OTC derivative markets have been very dynamic with a veritable explosion in outstanding contract volumes primarily over the past decade. The basic problem, however, is that this very dynamic evolution of OTC derivatives markets has outstripped development of the underlying clearing and settlement arrangements. Indeed, as the post-trading of OTC derivatives remained predominantly bilateral and non-standardised, the respective arrangements have become increasingly inadequate for coping with the growing volumes and complexity of OTC derivatives trades. This was highlighted in particular during the financial market turmoil, when higher trading activity and market volatility further aggravated the existing tensions. [The resulting processing backlogs and uncertainties about counterparty risk raised strong concerns among policymakers, as highlighted in the Financial Stability Forum’s April 2008 report [1] on the lessons from the financial turmoil.] The need to strengthen market infrastructures for credit default swaps (CDS) stems from the importance of CDS markets for overall financial stability, for three reasons. First, the systemic importance of CDS markets comes from the high degree of interconnectivity between CDS markets and credit and cash securities markets, the embedded financial leverage of CDS, and the significant level of CDS exposures in relation to the total assets and capital cushions of the banks involved. Second, the associated financial risks, for example when compared to interest rate and foreign exchange derivatives, are more difficult to manage. This stems from the greater underlying complexity and the correlations between different CDS exposures when market-wide strains occur. Third, specific risks to financial stability stem from the high degree of market concentration where very sizable financial risks are held by a small group of major market players. Therefore – as we have seen not only with the default of Lehman Brothers, but also the earlier near-defaults of Bear Stearns and AIG – the default of one major CDS counterparty can put these markets under very severe strain.A natural inference from our experiences during the current turmoil is, therefore, to improve the resilience of OTC derivatives markets through a more widespread adoption of central counterparty clearing or exchange trading. Central counterparties (CCPs), by concentrating all outstanding derivatives positions of the participating buyers and sellers in one place, enable a significant reduction in counterparty risk: firstly, through the diversification and netting of risk exposures; secondly, through the application of stringent risk-based margining procedures to ensure adequate management; thirdly, through collateralisation of outstanding exposures on at least a daily or even intra-day basis. In addition, CCPs also contribute significantly to market transparency and integrity and bring significant operational efficiency gains, e.g. through the standardisation of risk management processes as well as via multilateral netting and collateral management. As a result, public authorities and industry bodies worldwide have embraced the establishment of CCPs for CDS markets as a top priority and we expect a number of solutions in both the EU and the United States to be up and running by the end of July 2009. In view of the role of the euro for the derivatives market, I would welcome a CCP in the euro area. The effective and timely implementation of the respective roadmaps and full dealer commitment to making the maximum possible use of these facilities will be essential. Looking ahead, it will also be vital to ensure close convergence between the requirements and approaches of the overseers and regulators involved so as to maintain a level playing-field between the different CCPs and pre-empt possible regulatory arbitrage. At EU level, the forthcoming ESCB-CESR recommendations for central counterparties have already been revised to include specific guidance on their application to CCPs for OTC derivatives. It is now also crucial to achieve such a common understanding at the global level as well. In this respect, we look forward to the recently initiated joint efforts of the CPSS and IOSCO to review the CPSS-IOSCO recommendations for central counterparties issued in 2004.Finally, I wish to reiterate that the introduction of CCPs will not be a panacea for addressing all concerns regarding the resilience and efficiency of OTC derivatives markets. For instance, we will need complementary action to ensure better risk management and transparency as well for those products that are not yet sufficiently standardised to be eligible for central clearing. Furthermore, sound post-trading needs to be complemented by enhanced trading, pre-clearing and lifecycle management of OTC derivatives, e.g. via the greater use of automated trading and confirmation, portfolio compression, the registration of all trades in central data depositories, as well as enhanced risk management and disclosure requirements for the financial institutions involved in OTC derivatives trading. Let me finally come to the third issue we need to focus on beyond the current turmoil: the vital role of retail infrastructures in terms of financial stability. The retail business facilitates the bulk of payments related to the day-to-day lives and financial activities of both individuals and companies. It represents the financial system’s interface with the general public and is crucial for preserving confidence in the financial system and, ultimately, in the euro as the single currency. Two issues relating to the retail business and the current turmoil are noteworthy. First, the retail business – with its cornerstones of saving, lending, and payment services – has successfully withstood the financial crisis. Second, banks with a balanced business model have been best equipped to cope with the current challenges. Therefore, retail services offer two major opportunities at the present time: first, to revive confidence in the banking sector in the eyes of the general public; second, to strengthen banks’ balance sheets. However, one important – sometimes overlooked – issue seems a key prerequisite: in the same way as the large value infrastructures mentioned before, stable and efficient retail infrastructures are needed throughout Europe in order to alleviate systemic risk and safeguard financial stability. However, despite 50 years of European economic integration, Europe is still lacking an integrated retail payments market. Therefore, the further realisation and completion of the Single Euro Payments Area project is a crucial element for the retail banking and payments market beyond the turmoil. Without doubt, SEPA is the largest payment initiative undertaken in Europe, following the euro cash changeover. Major milestones have already been achieved: only recently, regulators have addressed the uncertainties surrounding interchange fees and the reachability of the SEPA Direct Debit. Nevertheless there are still a number of further topics on our common agenda, e.g. standardisation in cards, payment innovations, a migration end date, and the governance of payment issues at the European level. Harmonisation in the field of retail payments is a natural area for efficiency gains. However, the market is moving only slowly in this direction. Although SEPA continues to be a mainly self-regulated project, some elements might need more regulator involvement. The Eurosystem has emphasised that a realistic but ambitious SEPA migration end date is necessary. Such a date would facilitate communication and provide more certainty for all stakeholders. The most viable option for achieving an end date is through regulation by the public authorities. Since an EU regulation is probably the most effective option the Eurosystem appreciates the Commission’s launch of a public consultation on this topic. Only by tearing down the walls of fragmentation can we ultimately bring about harmonisation, efficiency gains and a level playing-field. Such a development inevitably leads to increased competition. I am fully aware that it is not easy – especially in a period of low growth and higher credit risks – to change revenue models. However, those who invest early will benefit and position themselves successfully. Corporates tell us that they would benefit from SEPA services because they are internationally connected. Taking into consideration the renewed relevance of retail payments, the key success factors in the years ahead will be harmonisation, innovation and increased competitiveness. Banks and infrastructures will successfully take up these challenges only by continuing to play an important role in retail payments.From the very beginning of the crisis, the ECB has acted in a decisive manner. It has taken a number of measures unprecedented in nature, scope and timing. The ECB has provided large amounts of liquidity support to banks. By making changes to its operational framework, the ECB made sure that all solvent banks would have sufficient access to funding. When the crisis intensified in September last year, we introduced a number of new measures. Most importantly, we provided banks with unlimited access to liquidity at fixed rates for up to six months. The ECB also expanded its list of assets eligible for use as collateral in the Eurosystem’s credit operations. Moreover, we recently announced further measures, namely to provide longer term refinancing up to one year and to purchase covered bonds of up to EUR 60 bn.Looking now beyond the turmoil on rules, regulation and infrastructures, the current financial turmoil has taught us one key lesson for the future: self-regulation is not sufficient for systemically important markets, institutions and infrastructures. Maintaining financial stability is in the public interest. Therefore, public authorities must take appropriate measures to regulate, supervise and oversee systemically important markets, institutions and infrastructures in order to prevent systemic risks spreading and safeguard the financial stability of the system. For market infrastructures, one lesson for the future is that, despite their remarkable resilience in the current crisis, there is no room for complacency given their crucial role in financial stability. On the contrary, overseers and regulators in future years need to increase their efforts towards ensuring safer and more secure market infrastructures and also to further strengthen EU market infrastructures. I have highlighted three specific areas for enhancement. First, the general crisis management arrangements, particularly on disseminating information and increasing awareness about default arrangements of market infrastructures. Second, measures for building market infrastructures for OTC derivatives, also in the euro area. And third – as in the case of large value payment systems – the need for a more integrated and harmonised retail payments structure. Therefore, I regard continued full support from all stakeholders for the effective and timely implementation of the Single Euro Payments Area as a key priority for the period ahead.Thank you for your attention.Chart 1 Values settled in TARGET per time bandChart 2 Evolution of the limits on the SSP Chart 3 Non-settled payments on the SSP [1] Financial Stability Forum, “Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience”, April 2008.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur particip open discuss confer organis choos titl panel given us challeng task look beyond current turmoil surround rule supervis infrastructur certain easi cannot yet speak end difficult period face financi real sector economi howev look beyond turmoil start implement lesson learn exact need point time background crisi draw right conclus begin design futur financi architectur includ new rule improv supervis oversight need done window opportun remain open forev close howev look beyond turmoil let take opportun first examin perform market infrastructur current crisi develop financi market fate specif institut heart public debat howev owe close interdepend financi market intermediari infrastructur difficulti affect institut market also knockon effect market infrastructur put function payment system central counterparti secur settlement system reallif stress test fortun illustr moment eu market infrastructur proven remark resili therebi limit overal system risk main due success interact industri regul overs like may italian bank sector also shown remark resili current circumst second part intervent would inde like look beyond current turmoil despit posit overal assess infrastructur point three area warrant particular attent futur market infrastructur first enhanc overal crisi manag arrang market infrastructur second involv strengthen market infrastructur otc deriv third given import retail market overal stabil effici financi system need complet singl euro payment area sepa financi market turmoil impact eu payment system central counterparti ccps secur settlement system main intensifi volatil market activ also seen peak transact volum well frequent higher margin call furthermor mani infrastructur cope default major particip notabl context demis lehman brother septemb correspond spillov effect subsidiari fortun eu market infrastructur abl effect overcom challeng without major oper disrupt particular eurosystem target system backbon largevalu payment infrastructur euro also play central role provid settlement servic retail payment system secur settlement system connect ancillari system proven stabl resili nonetheless would like mention three key stylis fact illustr impact current turmoil first valu process target last quarter show unusu high increas compar first three quarter see chart look averag valu settl differ time band day main differ third fourth quarter relat valu settl last hour oper reflect strong increas overnight deposit made bank nation central bank consequ switch full allot fix rate tender ecb open market oper follow intensif crisi collaps lehman brother septemb second surpris septemb onward see remark increas number sender limit along decreas valu see chart nonetheless chang margin impact smooth flow transact caus delay time submiss payment third level nonsettl payment remain fair stabl second half amount total daili averag valu settl system see chart indic overal resili target system face financi turmoil crucial market infrastructur continu function robust particular provid stabl network despit high disrupt condit financi market market infrastructur play import shockabsorb role help maintain overal public confid financi system sinc central bank overs financi regul recognis long ago critic import reliabl function market infrastructur overal financi stabil effici took action togeth servic provid stringent requir ensur eu infrastructur adequ design effect manag risk oper effici reliabl normal circumst time crisi recent experi suggest measur welltarget nevertheless area improv also identifi shall mention key area action state would like focus three area first improv relat overal crisi manag arrang second strengthen market infrastructur overthecount otc deriv third effort gear produc integr retail payment infrastructur one prioriti relat overal crisi manag arrang improv notif procedur particular regard communic insolv public author infrastructur provid market particip although general work well current turmoil measur progress foster exchang standardis inform addit measur need ensur close cooper author regard relationship default particip coordin measur limit impact default moreov might advantag infrastructur abl end unilater contractu relationship particip without wait final decis relev judici administr author furthermor current turmoil remind us default rule need suffici clear comprehens infrastructur particip also caus conflict infrastructur therefor infrastructur becom increas interlink coordin implement default rule vital mitig risk system level final default lehman brother major showcas sever implic institutionbas interdepend two infrastructur result exposur major financi institut particip infrastructur therefor crucial us continu close monitor interdepend individu institut order assess impact stabil infrastructur let turn need strengthen infrastructur otc deriv otc deriv market dynam verit explos outstand contract volum primarili past decad basic problem howev dynam evolut otc deriv market outstrip develop under clear settlement arrang inde posttrad otc deriv remain predomin bilater nonstandardis respect arrang becom increas inadequ cope grow volum complex otc deriv trade highlight particular financi market turmoil higher trade activ market volatil aggrav exist tension result process backlog uncertainti counterparti risk rais strong concern among policymak highlight financi stabil forum april report lesson financi turmoil need strengthen market infrastructur credit default swap cds stem import cds market overal financi stabil three reason first system import cds market come high degre interconnect cds market credit cash secur market embed financi leverag cds signific level cds exposur relat total asset capit cushion bank involv second associ financi risk exampl compar interest rate foreign exchang deriv difficult manag stem greater under complex correl differ cds exposur marketwid strain occur third specif risk financi stabil stem high degre market concentr sizabl financi risk held small group major market player therefor seen default lehman brother also earlier neardefault bear stearn aig default one major cds counterparti put market sever strain natur infer experi current turmoil therefor improv resili otc deriv market widespread adopt central counterparti clear exchang trade central counterparti ccps concentr outstand deriv posit particip buyer seller one place enabl signific reduct counterparti risk first diversif net risk exposur second applic stringent riskbas margin procedur ensur adequ manag third collateralis outstand exposur least daili even intraday basi addit ccps also contribut signific market transpar integr bring signific oper effici gain e g standardis risk manag process well via multilater net collater manag result public author industri bodi worldwid embrac establish ccps cds market top prioriti expect number solut eu unit state run end juli view role euro deriv market would welcom ccp euro area effect time implement respect roadmap full dealer commit make maximum possibl use facil essenti look ahead also vital ensur close converg requir approach overs regul involv maintain level playingfield differ ccps preempt possibl regulatori arbitrag eu level forthcom escbcesr recommend central counterparti alreadi revis includ specif guidanc applic ccps otc deriv also crucial achiev common understand global level well respect look forward recent initi joint effort cpss iosco review cpssiosco recommend central counterparti issu final wish reiter introduct ccps panacea address concern regard resili effici otc deriv market instanc need complementari action ensur better risk manag transpar well product yet suffici standardis elig central clear furthermor sound posttrad need complement enhanc trade preclear lifecycl manag otc deriv e g via greater use autom trade confirm portfolio compress registr trade central data depositori well enhanc risk manag disclosur requir financi institut involv otc deriv trade let final come third issu need focus beyond current turmoil vital role retail infrastructur term financi stabil retail busi facilit bulk payment relat daytoday live financi activ individu compani repres financi system interfac general public crucial preserv confid financi system ultim euro singl currenc two issu relat retail busi current turmoil noteworthi first retail busi cornerston save lend payment servic success withstood financi crisi second bank balanc busi model best equip cope current challeng therefor retail servic offer two major opportun present time first reviv confid bank sector eye general public second strengthen bank balanc sheet howev one import sometim overlook issu seem key prerequisit way larg valu infrastructur mention stabl effici retail infrastructur need throughout europ order allevi system risk safeguard financi stabil howev despit year european econom integr europ still lack integr retail payment market therefor realis complet singl euro payment area project crucial element retail bank payment market beyond turmoil without doubt sepa largest payment initi undertaken europ follow euro cash changeov major mileston alreadi achiev recent regul address uncertainti surround interchang fee reachabl sepa direct debit nevertheless still number topic common agenda e g standardis card payment innov migrat end date govern payment issu european level harmonis field retail payment natur area effici gain howev market move slowli direct although sepa continu main selfregul project element might need regul involv eurosystem emphasis realist ambiti sepa migrat end date necessari date would facilit communic provid certainti stakehold viabl option achiev end date regul public author sinc eu regul probabl effect option eurosystem appreci commiss launch public consult topic tear wall fragment ultim bring harmonis effici gain level playingfield develop inevit lead increas competit fulli awar easi especi period low growth higher credit risk chang revenu model howev invest earli benefit posit success corpor tell us would benefit sepa servic intern connect take consider renew relev retail payment key success factor year ahead harmonis innov increas competit bank infrastructur success take challeng continu play import role retail payment begin crisi ecb act decis manner taken number measur unpreced natur scope time ecb provid larg amount liquid support bank make chang oper framework ecb made sure solvent bank would suffici access fund crisi intensifi septemb last year introduc number new measur import provid bank unlimit access liquid fix rate six month ecb also expand list asset elig use collater eurosystem credit oper moreov recent announc measur name provid longer term refinanc one year purchas cover bond eur bn look beyond turmoil rule regul infrastructur current financi turmoil taught us one key lesson futur selfregul suffici system import market institut infrastructur maintain financi stabil public interest therefor public author must take appropri measur regul supervis overse system import market institut infrastructur order prevent system risk spread safeguard financi stabil system market infrastructur one lesson futur despit remark resili current crisi room complac given crucial role financi stabil contrari overs regul futur year need increas effort toward ensur safer secur market infrastructur also strengthen eu market infrastructur highlight three specif area enhanc first general crisi manag arrang particular dissemin inform increas awar default arrang market infrastructur second measur build market infrastructur otc deriv also euro area third case larg valu payment system need integr harmonis retail payment structur therefor regard continu full support stakehold effect time implement singl euro payment area key prioriti period ahead thank attent chart valu settl target per time bandchart evolut limit ssp chart nonsettl payment ssp financi stabil forum report financi stabil forum enhanc market institut resili april reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en