Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Supervision and central banking: improving the exchange of information,12-06-2008,European Central Bank,ECB,5230,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,It is an honour and a pleasure for me to speak today at this event. As the title of the session indicates, this is a time when both bankers and authorities need to think hard about the lessons to be drawn from the financial market turmoil, and even challenge conventional wisdom if necessary.In the last few years, the relationship between supervision and central banking has evolved. Following the example of the UK, supervisory responsibilities have been allocated in some countries to independent authorities, separate from the central bank. In other countries, such as the Netherlands, prudential supervision of all financial institutions has been fully integrated in the central bank. I do not want to repeat here all the arguments for or against the separation of supervision from central banking (they have been thoughtfully analysed by Charles Goodhart and Donato Masciandaro, among others). But I do recall that the ECB took a position in 2001 on the fundamental role of central banks in prudential supervision, stressing the importance of confidential supervisory information in the conduct of central banking functions. [2] The recent financial market turmoil has confirmed the importance of a smooth and efficient relationship between the central banking and supervisory functions; it has also led to a debate about a reform of the current supervisory structure in some countries such as the UK and the US. The report by the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) entitled “Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience” presented to the G7 last April includes a number of policy recommendations to help prevent any recurrence of financial stresses similar to the ones experienced during the current turmoil. Among its many recommendations, the FSF refers to the need for supervisory authorities and central banks to improve cooperation and their exchanges of information. It calls in particular for such exchanges to be rapid during periods of market strain. Today, I will focus my remarks on why supervisory information is relevant for central banks in general, and for the ECB in particular, in three core central banking functions: monetary policy, liquidity policy and financial stability assessment. I will consider each of these in turn.Let me start by considering the usefulness of supervisory information in the conduct of monetary policy. I will analyse, in particular, two points. First, the possible role of supervisory information to gain a better understanding of the behaviour of monetary and credit aggregates. Second, the potential usefulness of such information in understanding banks’ lending behaviour, the transmission of monetary policy through the banking system and financing conditions for households and firms.Since its inception, the European Central Bank has regularly utilised a wide array of banking data in its monetary analysis. The data are mainly based on the aggregate balance sheet statistics of euro area monetary and financial institutions (MFI) collected and compiled by the ECB/Eurosystem. Another important source of information on the situation of the euro area banking sector compiled by the Eurosystem is the quarterly Bank Lending Survey, which provides qualitative information about changes in banks’ credit standards and loan demand, and describes the factors contributing to these changes. Supervisory information is used to a limited extent. Let me make four general points about the usefulness of supervisory information in monetary policy decision-making. First, the ECB strongly encourages the ongoing efforts conducted under the aegis of the Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS) to achieve greater convergence in supervisory reporting by banks across the EU; second, supervisory data, by providing information about the distribution of key balance sheet and profit ratios across different groups of banks, can point to developments in specific areas of the economy not detectable by aggregate statistics; third, access to bank level-based supervisory data would allow central banks to more clearly identify empirical regularities and to better understand the interrelation between the various factors affecting and driving banks’ activities; fourth, and finally, I would like to stress the mutual benefits arising from an enhanced dialogue between banks, supervisors and central banks. From a monetary policy perspective, a more direct interaction with banks and supervisors would clearly enhance the scope of analysis and decision-making by giving the central banks a better feeling (in real time) for the underlying drivers of monetary and credit developments. As you will surely know, the ECB’s monetary analysis consists of extracting information about the risks to price stability from the analysis of developments in the monetary aggregates and their counterparts, in particular credit to the private sector, and it does so by exploiting the long-run link between money and prices. The Eurosystem MFI balance sheet statistics were designed with the monetary analysis in mind, and hence fulfil most of the requirements for conducting such an analysis. However, in some cases, supervisory information, such as that embedded in the so-called COREP (“Common Solvency Ratio Reporting”) and FINREP (“Financial Reporting”) templates, which bring together harmonised information about solvency ratios and other financial statement data of EU banks, could add substantial value to the analysis. In particular, supervisory-based information provides a more detailed breakdown of bank asset and liabilities than in the MFI balance sheet statistics, thus making it easier to interpret monetary and credit aggregates. For example, supervisory information on banks’ securitisation activities can help to improve the analysis of credit developments by avoiding the bias that would be incurred by not including assets transferred from the banks’ balance sheets. In addition, having access to supervisory information about the distribution across banks of key bank ratios, such as the capital position or write-downs and losses, would help to detect whether certain groups of banks (catering to specific types of borrowers) are more or less likely to cut back (or increase) their lending, in particular following changes in policy rates. The need to understand the reasons for the recent strong corporate loan growth is a clear example of how a regular dialogue with banks and their supervisors might contribute to improving the monetary analysis of the ECB. Indeed, supervisory information might lead to a better understanding of the relative importance of pre-committed credit lines and the precautionary nature of recent corporate lending. Hence, in certain cases supervisory information can help to improve the analysis of “special factors” influencing money and credit demand. The value of supervisory data on the euro area banking sector can arguably be even greater with respect to the ECB’s economic analysis. Consider the various channels through which banks may affect the way in which monetary policy actions are transmitted to the real side of the economy. In the euro area, banks are the major source of financing for firms and households. The extent to which banks adjust their lending and the pricing of loans in response to monetary policy actions influences the various channels through which monetary policy affects the economy. One transmission channel affected by bank behaviour is the degree and speed with which banks pass on changes in policy rates. Banks tend to adjust their lending rates only sluggishly in response to changes in monetary policy rates. [3] The stickiness of bank rates hinges among other things on financial structures and competition within the banking sector as well as on competition from market-based sources, including securitisation. [4] Supervisory information on banking activities, such as the use of credit transfer instruments and the relative importance of assets and liabilities held for trading, can be useful in enhancing this analysis.Another transmission channel often cited in the literature which has received increasing attention over the past two decades is the credit channel. Owing to informational asymmetries and principal-agent problems between banks and their borrowers, monetary policy may impact on the supply of loans. This can happen through the narrow or broad credit channel. [5] In the narrow credit channel, a monetary policy tightening may mean that some banks face balance sheet constraints, such as lower liquidity or capital holdings, and hence they may choose to restrain lending. Supervisory information about the health of the banking system can provide valuable input to any assessment of potential loan supply constraints. This analysis would be based on data on solvency and liquidity ratios, capital buffers, securitisation and credit risk transfer instruments. Whereas, for example, the Eurosystem Bank Lending Survey provides input into disentangling loan supply and demand effects, and thus helps to identify relevant supply-side effects, the survey remains qualitative in nature. Supervisory information based on a direct dialogue between the banks and supervisors can provide more enlightening evidence on these issues. This type of information may prove particularly relevant in times of turbulence.In the broad credit channel, monetary policy influences the creditworthiness of bank borrowers, for example, through changes in asset and hence collateral values, leading to a change in their external financing premium. This, in turn, may induce banks to alter their supply of loans to these borrowers. Supervisory information that could bear on these questions and that cannot be derived from either MFI balance sheet statistics or market-based sources are the extent to which banks hold collateralised exposures and the size of their exposures to the small and medium sized enterprises. All in all, while stressing that information currently available to the ECB/Eurosystem provides a very good basis for the economic and monetary analyses, the quality of the assessment of economic and monetary developments could in certain areas be further improved by accessing supervisory information. This would be particularly beneficial in times of bank distress. In particular, access to euro area-wide bank-level data is a key element in understanding empirical regularities and in projecting developments in monetary and credit aggregates. Research in the US has shown that bank supervisory information can help the central bank in forecasting macroeconomic variables and in guiding monetary policy. [6] Likewise, research based on euro area banks has illustrated the usefulness of supervisory information in exploring the links between macroeconomic developments, monetary policy and the banking sector. [7] For example, drawing on individual bank data on variables such as the risk characteristics of loans, non-performing loan ratios, solvency ratios and other measures of bank distress, many studies find a relationship between monetary policy actions and banks’ risk-taking and lending behaviour. Importantly, bank-level supervisory data would also make it possible to detect whether such relationships differ across banks of different type and size. I will now examine why supervisory information is important in assessing the credit risk (e.g. quality of collateral) that the central bank faces, especially in times of financial turbulence. Let me start by stating a general principle: to be effective, monetary policy implementation has to lie on sound financial institutions. If financial institutions are not sound, it will be harder to evaluate not only their demand for central bank money, but also the risks in supplying it to them. In the euro area, the main demand for central bank money is imposed by the Eurosystem on banks via reserve requirements, which need to be fulfilled by commercial banks on average over a so-called maintenance period, i.e. on a monthly basis. The ECB supplies the amount of central bank money that enables banks to smoothly fulfil their reserve requirements.Through its operations, the Eurosystem provides liquidity to a large group of banks, which then redistribute the liquidity to other institutions across the euro area. This is why, according to our procedures, [8] counterparties for Eurosystem monetary policy operations must fulfil certain eligibility criteria. First and foremost, counterparties must be financially sound. Therefore, up-to-date and constant supervisory information is absolutely critical in order to identify any distortion in the smooth functioning of the money markets, which then may impair monetary policy implementation. Indeed, the eligibility of our counterparties is under constant review.Such information has been crucial especially since the start of the financial turmoil. It allows us to identify the root causes of the tensions in money markets and to choose the appropriate remedies. As you know, substantial changes have affected the size, the composition and the funding of the asset side of banks’ balance sheets since August 2007. The size of banks’ balance sheets has increased because banks have had to retain assets initially intended for securitisation or sale and because they have had to transfer the underlying assets from their off-balance sheet vehicles back into their balance sheets. The sources of funding have also changed since securitisation has stopped and the repo market for non-government bonds has dried up. As a result, banks have raised their liquidity buffers by reducing their funding maturity gaps and by applying larger liquidity shocks as stress scenarios. As a result, banks have hoarded cash and cut back on their lending activities by reducing their counterparty limits and the range of collateral accepted for their repo operations. This type of behaviour is based on information asymmetry, namely the fact that one counterpart (the borrower) has more or better information on its own creditworthiness than the other counterpart (the lender) owing to the lack of transparency about the true valuation of its own assets. In a way, banks try to protect themselves against the dangers of increased adverse selection, i.e. a high probability of selecting the most risky counterpart. On top of that, the traditional group of investors, suppliers of liquidity for the banking sector, have altered their investment strategies. There is some evidence that money market funds and central banks (in the management of their foreign reserves) have shifted their investments from the banking system to safe-haven assets like Treasury bills or overnight repo transactions. These developments and frictions have inhibited a smooth distribution of liquidity through the inter-bank market, leading to a segmentation of the euro cash money market. This segmentation has led to a dramatic widening of the spreads between the unsecured (Euribor) and secured (OIS) markets. Against this background, a number of banks feel that they must secure their bids at the Eurosystem’s tender operations in order to get the liquidity they need from the Eurosystem, whom they see as the (almost) unique provider of euro liquidity. They are thus ready to bid very aggressively, in particular if they are “excluded” from the inter-bank and repo markets. In addition, banks have been very eager to pledge assets as collateral with us for which the private repo market continues to be at a standstill. The ECB normally collects this type of information through its Money Market Contact Group and in bilateral contacts with bank treasurers. Supervisory information could provide useful additional information, particularly on any change in banks’ funding conditions. Since mid-March, banks have shown their ability to enhance their balance sheets by raising capital, issuing long-term debt and selling portfolios of leveraged loans. At the end of May, USD 276 billion of capital had been raised by banks, which may be compared with the approximately USD 387 billion of write-downs and losses that had already been announced. This type of news, combined with the various actions taken by central banks, has contributed to a recovery in the prices of risky assets. Overall, supervisory information would be an important input into the ECB’s efforts to ensuring an effective implementation of monetary policy. It has proven to be particularly crucial during the turmoil. Looking ahead, cooperation between supervisors and bodies responsible for monetary policy implementation could be enhanced through a more frequent transmission of information related to the composition and the funding of the balance sheets of financial institutions (like the change in the so-called funding gaps).I turn now to assess to what extent supervisory information may help the financial stability monitoring and assessment conducted by central banks, including the ECB. The ECB has in fact developed this activity in line with the Treaty, which stipulates that the ESCB “shall contribute to the smooth conduct of policies pursued by the competent authorities relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions and the stability of the financial system” (Art. 105.5). [9]With respect to financial stability, I will address two questions. First, what precise information do we need for carrying out our financial stability assessment function? Second, what would we do with this information, if we had it?The ECB regularly monitors the stability of the financial system – comprising financial intermediaries, markets and market infrastructures – in the euro area and has published since December 2004 its assessment every six months in its Financial Stability Review. The Review draws attention to the main sources of risk and vulnerabilities, and assesses whether the euro area financial system is capable of withstanding shocks and disruptions which are severe enough to significantly impair its intermediation function. This periodic assessment is based on information stemming from manifold sources, including of supervisory nature. In particular, regular aggregate information on the solvency and profitability of the banking sector as well as ad hoc information on specific exposures of the banking sector are collected by the ECB in cooperation with the Banking Supervision Committee. There is certainly room for enhancing the access to supervisory information for the ECB’s financial stability assessment. In normal times, a wider access – in terms of the timeliness and frequency of information on banks’ exposures and risk concentrations – would improve the identification of potential risks to the stability of the euro area financial system as well as the assessment of the potential impact on the system of the possible materialisation of the identified risks. As Fed Chairman Bernanke recently said: “For risks to financial stability to be successfully managed, they must first be identified and measured. Recent developments have revealed deficiencies in this respect”.Before the outbreak of the market turmoil in mid-2007, conventional wisdom held that banks had successfully removed credit risk from their balance sheets, thanks to financial innovations such as mortgage-backed securities, collateralised debt obligations and the use of structured investment vehicles (SIVs). Relatively little was known about the role and activities of SIVs and the exact nature of their relationship with banks. One could argue that, if more in-depth supervisory information had been available on these aspects, central banks, including the ECB, could have seen that banks’ credit risk transfer to SIVs and investors was in many cases incomplete and that banks remained liable for SIVs’ liabilities. Of course, it’s easy to say this with hindsight but we should now learn from this experience. In a situation of financial stress, supervisory information remains essential is the central bank financial stability assessment is to be effective. However, the nature of each financial stress is likely to differ from the previous ones. Therefore, the information needs have to be identified on a case-by-case basis. In the context of the current turmoil, a key supervisory information is that on bank direct exposures to the US sub-prime sector and to structured financial products as well as to the effects of write-downs on banks’ capital position. Overall, a wide access by central banks, including the ECB, to supervisory information would render their financial stability assessment more effective both to monitor and prevent financial stresses. At the same time, the outcome of the central banks’ financial stability assessment can be of use to supervisory authorities, for instance, by helping them focus their monitoring activity on certain categories of risk. This is the rationale behind the specific FSF recommendation which I mentioned at the beginning, namely, to enhance the interplay between central banks and supervisory authorities. Coming closer to the end of my remarks, let me now turn to institutional arrangements. The task of contributing to the smooth conduct of supervisory policies, mentioned in Art. 105.5 of the EU Treaty, was given to the ESCB on several grounds. Central banks have a large body of inside knowledge which may help in the exercise of prudential supervision, and measures to counter financial market fragility may, on the other hand, have monetary aspects which should be discussed by central banks [10]. Moreover, information held by the ESCB, for instance, in the context of its role in the oversight of payment systems may be of great use for supervisory authorities. Payment systems oversight and prudential supervision focus on avoiding systemic risks and safeguarding the soundness of financial institutions. At the same time, it should be stressed that the flow of information from (instead of to) the supervisory authorities and a mutually fruitful cooperation between supervisory authorities and central banks are crucial, with the latter being entrusted with a contributory task in the field of macro-prudential supervision [11]. The ECB has pointed out in various opinions that ‘central bank access to prudential information and cooperation between financial supervisory authorities and central banks are essential for the conduct of macro-prudential monitoring, the oversight of payment systems and the safeguarding of other market infrastructures, which are in turn essential for the smooth conduct of monetary policy’.If we examine closely the current EU legal framework applicable to the exchange of information between central banks and supervisory authorities, we note that the EU Treaty is ‘asymmetric’ since it does not contain any provisions requiring the banking supervisory authorities to contribute to the performance of the tasks under the responsibility of the ECB or the ESCB, in the same way that the ECB and the ESCB contribute to the smooth functioning of supervisory policies. This may have historical roots: the national supervisory authorities, unlike the ECB or the ESCB, are not Community law bodies and do not have a European mandate enshrined in the Treaty. However, this entails some limitation in the ability of the ECB and the ESCB to perform their tasks.One has to take into account a series of facts that make this problem less acute. First, a number of central banks in the euro area perform supervisory functions and therefore have easy access to supervisory information. Second, European secondary legislation, namely a number of Community directives applicable to the financial sector – and, for instance, the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD) – addresses the issue of the cooperation and exchange of information at EU level between supervisory authorities themselves but also between banking supervisory authorities and central banks. The CRD identifies a number of exceptions or ‘gateways’ through which Member States may authorise confidential information to be disclosed, in most cases subject to conditions of professional secrecy. This Directive provides in particular that exchange of information should be authorised between supervisory authorities and central banks in their capacity as monetary authorities. Third, in previous Opinions on draft national laws, the ECB has observed that virtually all Member States that have adopted supervisory models based on an independent financial supervisory authority have included provisions stipulating a duty of cooperation and authorising the exchange of information between central banks and supervisory authorities. [12]Against this backdrop, it is essential to eliminate all legislative obstacles that prevent supervisory authorities from providing information to the ECB and Eurosystem central banks on specific banking and financial institutions as well as to guarantee more generally a duty of cooperation between central banks and supervisory authorities, whose ultimate purpose is to put in place effective and practical arrangements for cooperation and information-sharing. This should be a priority in the European Union.The European Commission has recently launched a public consultation on possible targeted amendments to the CRD [13] which includes aspects relating to cooperation and exchange of information between banking supervisory authorities and central banks. More specifically, the proposed amendments to the CRD include two new provisions. First, “ in an emergency situation, Member States shall allow competent authorities to communicate information to central banks in the EU when this information is relevant for the exercise of their respective statutory tasks, including the conduct of monetary policy, the oversight of payments and securities settlement systems, and the safeguarding of financial stability”. Second, the consolidating supervisor should alert the relevant central banks and communicate to them all information that is essential for the pursuance of their tasks should an emergency situation, including adverse developments in financial markets, arise within a banking group which potentially jeopardises the stability of the financial system in any of the Member States where entities of the group are located.In 2001 the Eurosystem highlighted the importance of the role played by central banks in supervision. The experience gained by central banks during the financial market turmoil confirms the fundamental appropriateness of the Eurosystem’s position, which is also shared across the Atlantic. In the US, a discussion has already started on how to improve coordination between the various authorities and on how to put the Federal Reserve in a position to better contribute to financial market stability. Tim Geithner has recently called for more powers to be given to the Federal Reserve in the field of oversight. In the European Union, the European Commission has launched initiatives to further reinforce the legal underpinnings for the cooperation and the exchange of information between supervisory authorities and central banks, and to build a consistent institutional framework for such an exchange. These initiatives are strongly supported by the ECB and should be implemented soon. Improving the institutional framework is necessary, but not sufficient. It has to be followed by an effective implementation of the provisions and the activation of the available channels of communication between supervisors and the central banks, including the ECB. A substantial amount of work is already underway. It is up to us to make sure that it is finalised in time to address any challenges that global financial markets may pose to stability.Thank you for your attention.Altunbas, Y., Gambacorta, L. and Marqués, D. (2007), “Securitisation and monetary policy”, forthcoming ECB Working Paper.Angeloni, I., Kashyap, A.N., Mojon, B., eds. (2003), Monetary Policy Transmission in the Euro Area, Cambridge University Press.Berger, A.N. and Udell, G.F. (1992), “Some evidence on the empirical significance of credit rationing”, The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 100, No 5 (October), 1047-1077.Berlin, M. and Mester, L.J. (1999), “Deposits and relationship lending”, The Review of Financial Studies, Fall 1999, Vol. 12, No 3, 579-607.Bernanke, B.S. and Blinder, A.S. (1988), “Credit, money, and aggregate demand”, American Economic Review, 78(2), May, 435-439.Bernanke, B.S. and Gertler, M. (1989), “Agency costs, net worth, and business fluctuations”, American Economic Review, 79(1), March, 14-31.Bernanke, B.S. and Gertler, M. (1995), “Inside the black box: the credit channel of monetary policy transmission”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9(1), 27-48.Bernanke, B.S., Gertler, M. and Gilchrist, S. (1999), “The financial accelerator in a quantitative business cycle framework”, in Handbook of Macroeconomics, Taylor, J. and Woodford, M. (eds.).Bernanke, B.S. (2007), “The financial accelerator and the credit channel”, Remarks at the conference on the Credit Channel of Monetary Policy in the Twenty-first Century, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Georgia, June 15, 2007.Bondt, G. de (2005), “Interest rate pass-through: Empirical results for the euro area”, German Economic Review, Vol 6, No 1 (February), 37-78.Cottarelli, C. and Kourelis, A. (1994), “Financial structure, bank lending rates, and the transmission of monetary policy”, IMF Working Paper 94/39.De Graeve, F., Kick, T. and Koetter, M. (2008), “Monetary policy and bank distress: An integrated micro-macro approach”, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Papers No 03/2008 (Series 2: Banking and Financial Studies).Ehrmann, M., Gambacorta, L., Martinés Pagés, J., Sevestre, P., and Worms, A. (2001), “Financial systems and the role of banks in monetary policy transmission in the euro area”, ECB Working Paper No 105.Estrella, A. (2002), “Securitization and the Efficacy of Monetary Policy”, Economic Policy Review, Volume 8, No 1. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York. May, pp. 243-255.Gambacorta, L. (2004), “How do banks set their interest rates?”, NBER Working Paper No  10295.Gambacorta, L. and Mistrulli, P.E. (2004), “Does bank capital affect lending behaviour?”, Journal of Financial Intermediation, 13, 436-457.Goodhart, C.A.E. (2000), The Organisational Structure of Banking Supervision, FSI Occasional Papers, No 1 – November 2000-10-25.Gropp, R., Kok Sørensen, C. and Lichtenberger, J. (2007), “The dynamics of bank spreads and financial structure”, ECB Working Paper No 714.Hannan, T.H. and Berger, A.N. (1991), “The rigidity of prices: Evidence from the banking industry”, American Economic Review, Vol. 81, No 4 (September), 938-945.Jimenez, G. and Saurina, J. (2005), “Credit cycles, credit risk and prudential regulation”, Banco de España Working Paper No 0531.Jimenez, G., Ongena, S., Peydro, J. and Saurina, J. (2007), “Hazardous times for monetary policy: What do twenty-three million bank loans say about the effects of monetary policy on credit risk taking?”, CEPR Discussion Paper No 6514.Kashyap and Stein (2000), “What do a million observations on banks say about the transmission of monetary policy?”, American Economic Review, Vol. 90, No 3, pp. 407-428.Kok Sørensen, C. and Werner, T. (2006), ”Bank interest rate pass-through in the euro area: A cross-country comparison”, ECB Working Paper No 580.Masciandaro, D. (2008), Politicians and Financial Supervision outside the Central Bank: Why Do They Do it?, American law and Economics Association Annual Meetings, Paper 121.Mester, L.J. and Saunders, A. (1995), “When does the prime rate change?”, Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 19, No 5 (August), 743-764.Mojon, B. (2001), “Financial structure and the interest rate channel of monetary policy”, Economie et Prevision No 147, 1, pp 89-115.Peek, J., Rosengren, E.S., and Tootell, G.M.B. (1999), “Is bank supervision central to central banking?”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 114 (2), pp. 629-653, May.Quagliariello, M. (2006), “Banks’ riskiness over the business cycle: A panel analysis of Italian intermediaries”, Banca d’Italia Temi di Discussioni No 599, September.Quagliariello, M. (2007), “Macroeconomic uncertainty and banks’ lending decision: The case of Italy” , Banca d’Italia Temi di Discussioni No 615, FebruarySander, H. and Kleimeier, S. (2004), “Convergence in Euro Zone retail banking?”, LIFE Working Paper 04-005.Van Leuvensteijn, M., Kok Sørensen, C., Bikker, J.A. and van Rixtel, A. (2007), “Impact of bank competition on the interest rate pass-through in the euro area”, ECB Working Paper No 885.[1]  The views expressed are those of the author. I thank C. Kok Sørensen, C. Beuve, C. Ohlerich, S. Kerjean, N. Valckx and F. Recine for their input into the preparation of these remarks.[2]  See ECB, “Recent developments in supervisory structures in the EU and acceding countries”, October 2006, available on the ECB's website.[3] For the US, see e.g. Hannan and Berger (1991), Berger and Udell (1992), Mester and Saunders (1995), Berlin and Mester (1999). For more recent studies on the euro area, see e.g. Mojon (2001), de Bondt (2005), Gambacorta (2004), Sander and Kleimeier (2004) and Kok Sørensen and Werner (2006).[4] See e.g. Cottarelli and Kourelis (1995), Mojon (2001), Estrella (2002), Gropp et al. (2006) and Van Leuvensteijn et al. (2007).[5]  See Bernanke and Blinder (1988), Bernanke and Gertler (1989, 1995), Bernanke and Gertler and Gilchrist (1999) and Kashyap and Stein (2000) for some of the seminal contributions to this line of the literature. Empirical findings for the euro area can be found in Ehrmann et al. (2001), Angeloni and Ehrmann (2003), Gambacorta and Mistrulli (2004), Altunbas et al. (2007).[6] See Peek, Rosengren and Tootell (1999).[7] For a few examples, see e.g. Quagliariello (2006, 2007); Jimenez, Ongena, Peydro and Saurina (2007); Jimenez and Saurina (2005); and De Graeve, Kick and Koetter (2008).[8] See General Documentation attached to the Guideline of the ECB on monetary policy instruments and procedures of the Eurosystem (available at www.ecb.europa.eu).[9] This provision is replicated in Art. 3.3. of the Protocol on the Statute of the European System of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank.[10] See R. Smits, The European Central Bank, Institutional aspects (Kluwer International, 2000), p.340.[11] R. Smits (Ibid), p.342.[12] See, for instance, the Opinion of the ECB of 5 November 2007 at the request of the Austrian Ministry of Finance on a draft law amending the Law on banking, the Law on savings banks, the Law on the Financial Market Supervisory Authority and the Law on the Oesterreichische Nationalbank (CON/2007/33), paragraph 2.4.1 or the Opinion of the ECB of 9 March 2006 at the request of the Polish Minister of Finance on a draft law on the supervision of financial institutions (CON/2006/15), paragraph 2.2.2. [13] European Commission, ‘Public consultation on possible changes to the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD, consisting of Directives 2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC)’ (available at www.europa.eu).Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen honour pleasur speak today event titl session indic time banker author need think hard lesson drawn financi market turmoil even challeng convent wisdom necessari last year relationship supervis central bank evolv follow exampl uk supervisori respons alloc countri independ author separ central bank countri netherland prudenti supervis financi institut fulli integr central bank want repeat argument separ supervis central bank thought analys charl goodhart donato masciandaro among other recal ecb took posit fundament role central bank prudenti supervis stress import confidenti supervisori inform conduct central bank function recent financi market turmoil confirm import smooth effici relationship central bank supervisori function also led debat reform current supervisori structur countri uk us report financi stabil forum fsf entitl enhanc market institut resili present g last april includ number polici recommend help prevent recurr financi stress similar one experienc current turmoil among mani recommend fsf refer need supervisori author central bank improv cooper exchang inform call particular exchang rapid period market strain today focus remark supervisori inform relev central bank general ecb particular three core central bank function monetari polici liquid polici financi stabil assess consid turn let start consid use supervisori inform conduct monetari polici analys particular two point first possibl role supervisori inform gain better understand behaviour monetari credit aggreg second potenti use inform understand bank lend behaviour transmiss monetari polici bank system financ condit household firm sinc incept european central bank regular utilis wide array bank data monetari analysi data main base aggreg balanc sheet statist euro area monetari financi institut mfi collect compil ecbeurosystem anoth import sourc inform situat euro area bank sector compil eurosystem quarter bank lend survey provid qualit inform chang bank credit standard loan demand describ factor contribut chang supervisori inform use limit extent let make four general point use supervisori inform monetari polici decisionmak first ecb strong encourag ongo effort conduct aegi committe european bank supervisor ceb achiev greater converg supervisori report bank across eu second supervisori data provid inform distribut key balanc sheet profit ratio across differ group bank point develop specif area economi detect aggreg statist third access bank levelbas supervisori data would allow central bank clear identifi empir regular better understand interrel various factor affect drive bank activ fourth final would like stress mutual benefit aris enhanc dialogu bank supervisor central bank monetari polici perspect direct interact bank supervisor would clear enhanc scope analysi decisionmak give central bank better feel real time under driver monetari credit develop sure know ecb monetari analysi consist extract inform risk price stabil analysi develop monetari aggreg counterpart particular credit privat sector exploit longrun link money price eurosystem mfi balanc sheet statist design monetari analysi mind henc fulfil requir conduct analysi howev case supervisori inform embed socal corep common solvenc ratio report finrep financi report templat bring togeth harmonis inform solvenc ratio financi statement data eu bank could add substanti valu analysi particular supervisorybas inform provid detail breakdown bank asset liabil mfi balanc sheet statist thus make easier interpret monetari credit aggreg exampl supervisori inform bank securitis activ help improv analysi credit develop avoid bias would incur includ asset transfer bank balanc sheet addit access supervisori inform distribut across bank key bank ratio capit posit writedown loss would help detect whether certain group bank cater specif type borrow less like cut back increas lend particular follow chang polici rate need understand reason recent strong corpor loan growth clear exampl regular dialogu bank supervisor might contribut improv monetari analysi ecb inde supervisori inform might lead better understand relat import precommit credit line precautionari natur recent corpor lend henc certain case supervisori inform help improv analysi special factor influenc money credit demand valu supervisori data euro area bank sector arguabl even greater respect ecb econom analysi consid various channel bank may affect way monetari polici action transmit real side economi euro area bank major sourc financ firm household extent bank adjust lend price loan respons monetari polici action influenc various channel monetari polici affect economi one transmiss channel affect bank behaviour degre speed bank pass chang polici rate bank tend adjust lend rate sluggish respons chang monetari polici rate sticki bank rate hing among thing financi structur competit within bank sector well competit marketbas sourc includ securitis supervisori inform bank activ use credit transfer instrument relat import asset liabil held trade use enhanc analysi anoth transmiss channel often cite literatur receiv increas attent past two decad credit channel owe inform asymmetri principalag problem bank borrow monetari polici may impact suppli loan happen narrow broad credit channel narrow credit channel monetari polici tighten may mean bank face balanc sheet constraint lower liquid capit hold henc may choos restrain lend supervisori inform health bank system provid valuabl input assess potenti loan suppli constraint analysi would base data solvenc liquid ratio capit buffer securitis credit risk transfer instrument wherea exampl eurosystem bank lend survey provid input disentangl loan suppli demand effect thus help identifi relev supplysid effect survey remain qualit natur supervisori inform base direct dialogu bank supervisor provid enlighten evid issu type inform may prove particular relev time turbul broad credit channel monetari polici influenc creditworthi bank borrow exampl chang asset henc collater valu lead chang extern financ premium turn may induc bank alter suppli loan borrow supervisori inform could bear question cannot deriv either mfi balanc sheet statist marketbas sourc extent bank hold collateralis exposur size exposur small medium size enterpris stress inform current avail ecbeurosystem provid good basi econom monetari analys qualiti assess econom monetari develop could certain area improv access supervisori inform would particular benefici time bank distress particular access euro areawid banklevel data key element understand empir regular project develop monetari credit aggreg research us shown bank supervisori inform help central bank forecast macroeconom variabl guid monetari polici likewis research base euro area bank illustr use supervisori inform explor link macroeconom develop monetari polici bank sector exampl draw individu bank data variabl risk characterist loan nonperform loan ratio solvenc ratio measur bank distress mani studi find relationship monetari polici action bank risktak lend behaviour import banklevel supervisori data would also make possibl detect whether relationship differ across bank differ type size examin supervisori inform import assess credit risk e g qualiti collater central bank face especi time financi turbul let start state general principl effect monetari polici implement lie sound financi institut financi institut sound harder evalu demand central bank money also risk suppli euro area main demand central bank money impos eurosystem bank via reserv requir need fulfil commerci bank averag socal mainten period e month basi ecb suppli amount central bank money enabl bank smooth fulfil reserv requir oper eurosystem provid liquid larg group bank redistribut liquid institut across euro area accord procedur counterparti eurosystem monetari polici oper must fulfil certain elig criteria first foremost counterparti must financi sound therefor uptod constant supervisori inform absolut critic order identifi distort smooth function money market may impair monetari polici implement inde elig counterparti constant review inform crucial especi sinc start financi turmoil allow us identifi root caus tension money market choos appropri remedi know substanti chang affect size composit fund asset side bank balanc sheet sinc august size bank balanc sheet increas bank retain asset initi intend securitis sale transfer under asset offbal sheet vehicl back balanc sheet sourc fund also chang sinc securitis stop repo market nongovern bond dri result bank rais liquid buffer reduc fund matur gap appli larger liquid shock stress scenario result bank hoard cash cut back lend activ reduc counterparti limit rang collater accept repo oper type behaviour base inform asymmetri name fact one counterpart borrow better inform creditworthi counterpart lender owe lack transpar true valuat asset way bank tri protect danger increas advers select e high probabl select riski counterpart top tradit group investor supplier liquid bank sector alter invest strategi evid money market fund central bank manag foreign reserv shift invest bank system safehaven asset like treasuri bill overnight repo transact develop friction inhibit smooth distribut liquid interbank market lead segment euro cash money market segment led dramat widen spread unsecur euribor secur oi market background number bank feel must secur bid eurosystem tender oper order get liquid need eurosystem see almost uniqu provid euro liquid thus readi bid aggress particular exclud interbank repo market addit bank eager pledg asset collater us privat repo market continu standstil ecb normal collect type inform money market contact group bilater contact bank treasur supervisori inform could provid use addit inform particular chang bank fund condit sinc midmarch bank shown abil enhanc balanc sheet rais capit issu longterm debt sell portfolio leverag loan end may usd billion capit rais bank may compar approxim usd billion writedown loss alreadi announc type news combin various action taken central bank contribut recoveri price riski asset overal supervisori inform would import input ecb effort ensur effect implement monetari polici proven particular crucial turmoil look ahead cooper supervisor bodi respons monetari polici implement could enhanc frequent transmiss inform relat composit fund balanc sheet financi institut like chang socal fund gap turn assess extent supervisori inform may help financi stabil monitor assess conduct central bank includ ecb ecb fact develop activ line treati stipul escb shall contribut smooth conduct polici pursu compet author relat prudenti supervis credit institut stabil financi system art respect financi stabil address two question first precis inform need carri financi stabil assess function second would inform ecb regular monitor stabil financi system compris financi intermediari market market infrastructur euro area publish sinc decemb assess everi six month financi stabil review review draw attent main sourc risk vulner assess whether euro area financi system capabl withstand shock disrupt sever enough signific impair intermedi function period assess base inform stem manifold sourc includ supervisori natur particular regular aggreg inform solvenc profit bank sector well ad hoc inform specif exposur bank sector collect ecb cooper bank supervis committe certain room enhanc access supervisori inform ecb financi stabil assess normal time wider access term timeli frequenc inform bank exposur risk concentr would improv identif potenti risk stabil euro area financi system well assess potenti impact system possibl materialis identifi risk fed chairman bernank recent said risk financi stabil success manag must first identifi measur recent develop reveal defici respect outbreak market turmoil mid convent wisdom held bank success remov credit risk balanc sheet thank financi innov mortgageback secur collateralis debt oblig use structur invest vehicl siv relat littl known role activ siv exact natur relationship bank one could argu indepth supervisori inform avail aspect central bank includ ecb could seen bank credit risk transfer siv investor mani case incomplet bank remain liabl siv liabil cours easi say hindsight learn experi situat financi stress supervisori inform remain essenti central bank financi stabil assess effect howev natur financi stress like differ previous one therefor inform need identifi casebycas basi context current turmoil key supervisori inform bank direct exposur us subprim sector structur financi product well effect writedown bank capit posit overal wide access central bank includ ecb supervisori inform would render financi stabil assess effect monitor prevent financi stress time outcom central bank financi stabil assess use supervisori author instanc help focus monitor activ certain categori risk rational behind specif fsf recommend mention begin name enhanc interplay central bank supervisori author come closer end remark let turn institut arrang task contribut smooth conduct supervisori polici mention art eu treati given escb sever ground central bank larg bodi insid knowledg may help exercis prudenti supervis measur counter financi market fragil may hand monetari aspect discuss central bank moreov inform held escb instanc context role oversight payment system may great use supervisori author payment system oversight prudenti supervis focus avoid system risk safeguard sound financi institut time stress flow inform instead supervisori author mutual fruit cooper supervisori author central bank crucial latter entrust contributori task field macroprudenti supervis ecb point various opinion central bank access prudenti inform cooper financi supervisori author central bank essenti conduct macroprudenti monitor oversight payment system safeguard market infrastructur turn essenti smooth conduct monetari polici examin close current eu legal framework applic exchang inform central bank supervisori author note eu treati asymmetr sinc contain provis requir bank supervisori author contribut perform task respons ecb escb way ecb escb contribut smooth function supervisori polici may histor root nation supervisori author unlik ecb escb communiti law bodi european mandat enshrin treati howev entail limit abil ecb escb perform task one take account seri fact make problem less acut first number central bank euro area perform supervisori function therefor easi access supervisori inform second european secondari legisl name number communiti direct applic financi sector instanc capit requir direct crd address issu cooper exchang inform eu level supervisori author also bank supervisori author central bank crd identifi number except gateway member state may authoris confidenti inform disclos case subject condit profession secreci direct provid particular exchang inform authoris supervisori author central bank capac monetari author third previous opinion draft nation law ecb observ virtual member state adopt supervisori model base independ financi supervisori author includ provis stipul duti cooper authoris exchang inform central bank supervisori author backdrop essenti elimin legisl obstacl prevent supervisori author provid inform ecb eurosystem central bank specif bank financi institut well guarante general duti cooper central bank supervisori author whose ultim purpos put place effect practic arrang cooper informationshar prioriti european union european commiss recent launch public consult possibl target amend crd includ aspect relat cooper exchang inform bank supervisori author central bank specif propos amend crd includ two new provis first emerg situat member state shall allow compet author communic inform central bank eu inform relev exercis respect statutori task includ conduct monetari polici oversight payment secur settlement system safeguard financi stabil second consolid supervisor alert relev central bank communic inform essenti pursuanc task emerg situat includ advers develop financi market aris within bank group potenti jeopardis stabil financi system member state entiti group locat eurosystem highlight import role play central bank supervis experi gain central bank financi market turmoil confirm fundament appropri eurosystem posit also share across atlant us discuss alreadi start improv coordin various author put feder reserv posit better contribut financi market stabil tim geithner recent call power given feder reserv field oversight european union european commiss launch initi reinforc legal underpin cooper exchang inform supervisori author central bank build consist institut framework exchang initi strong support ecb implement soon improv institut framework necessari suffici follow effect implement provis activ avail channel communic supervisor central bank includ ecb substanti amount work alreadi underway us make sure finalis time address challeng global financi market may pose stabil thank attent altunba y gambacorta l marqué d securitis monetari polici forthcom ecb work paper angeloni kashyap n mojon b ed monetari polici transmiss euro area cambridg univers press berger n udel g f evid empir signific credit ration journal polit economi vol octob berlin m mester l j deposit relationship lend review financi studi fall vol bernank b blinder credit money aggreg demand american econom review may bernank b gertler m agenc cost net worth busi fluctuat american econom review march bernank b gertler m insid black box credit channel monetari polici transmiss journal econom perspect bernank b gertler m gilchrist financi acceler quantit busi cycl framework handbook macroeconom taylor j woodford m ed bernank b financi acceler credit channel remark confer credit channel monetari polici twentyfirst centuri feder reserv bank atlanta georgia june bondt g de interest rate passthrough empir result euro area german econom review vol februari cottarelli c kour financi structur bank lend rate transmiss monetari polici imf work paper de graev f kick koetter m monetari polici bank distress integr micromacro approach deutsch bundesbank discuss paper seri bank financi studi ehrmann m gambacorta l martiné pagé j sevestr p worm financi system role bank monetari polici transmiss euro area ecb work paper estrella securit efficaci monetari polici econom polici review volum new york feder reserv bank new york may pp gambacorta l bank set interest rate nber work paper gambacorta l mistrulli p e bank capit affect lend behaviour journal financi intermedi goodhart c e organis structur bank supervis fsi occasion paper novemb gropp r kok sørensen c lichtenberg j dynam bank spread financi structur ecb work paper hannan h berger n rigid price evid bank industri american econom review vol septemb jimenez g saurina j credit cycl credit risk prudenti regul banco de españa work paper jimenez g ongena peydro j saurina j hazard time monetari polici twentythre million bank loan say effect monetari polici credit risk take cepr discuss paper kashyap stein million observ bank say transmiss monetari polici american econom review vol pp kok sørensen c werner bank interest rate passthrough euro area crosscountri comparison ecb work paper masciandaro d politician financi supervis outsid central bank american law econom associ annual meet paper mester l j saunder prime rate chang journal bank financ vol august mojon b financi structur interest rate channel monetari polici economi et previs pp peek j rosengren e tootel g m b bank supervis central central bank quarter journal econom vol pp may quagliariello m bank riski busi cycl panel analysi italian intermediari banca d italia temi di discussioni septemb quagliariello m macroeconom uncertainti bank lend decis case itali banca d italia temi di discussioni februarysand h kleimeier converg euro zone retail bank life work paper van leuvensteijn m kok sørensen c bikker j van rixtel impact bank competit interest rate passthrough euro area ecb work paper view express author thank c kok sørensen c beuv c ohlerich kerjean n valckx f recin input prepar remark see ecb recent develop supervisori structur eu acced countri octob avail ecb websit us see e g hannan berger berger udel mester saunder berlin mester recent studi euro area see e g mojon de bondt gambacorta sander kleimeier kok sørensen werner see e g cottarelli kour mojon estrella gropp et al van leuvensteijn et al see bernank blinder bernank gertler bernank gertler gilchrist kashyap stein semin contribut line literatur empir find euro area found ehrmann et al angeloni ehrmann gambacorta mistrulli altunba et al see peek rosengren tootel exampl see e g quagliariello jimenez ongena peydro saurina jimenez saurina de graev kick koetter see general document attach guidelin ecb monetari polici instrument procedur eurosystem avail www ecb europa eu provis replic art protocol statut european system central bank european central bank see r smit european central bank institut aspect kluwer intern p r smit ibid p see instanc opinion ecb novemb request austrian ministri financ draft law amend law bank law save bank law financi market supervisori author law oesterreichisch nationalbank con paragraph opinion ecb march request polish minist financ draft law supervis financi institut con paragraph european commiss public consult possibl chang capit requir direct crd consist direct ec ec avail www europa eu reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en