Jean-Claude Trichet: The process of European economic and financial integration,01-10-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,2042,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,It is a great honour and pleasure for me to be invited to offer some remarks at this conference organised by the National Euro Changeover Committee and the Central Bank of Malta, just three months before Malta adopts the euro on 1 January 2008. This will signify a great milestone in Malta’s history, especially since Malta only joined the European Union (EU) almost four years ago, on 1 May 2004.You can be proud of Malta’s successful convergence process. In fact, we are very pleased about the fruitful cooperation between the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Central Bank of Malta in the preparations for the changeover, be it at the technical level or through the participation of Governor Bonello as observer in the Governing Council since last July. Preparations for EU membership and the adoption of the euro have spurred a broad-based reform process, which has led to the restructuring of the public enterprise sector and the liberalisation of the trade regime. These reforms have helped Malta to gradually reduce inflation and significantly shrink the fiscal deficit. Moreover, the exchange rate of the Maltese lira has been maintained at the central rate since the currency joined ERM II in May 2005, and long-term interest rates have declined. The adoption of the euro should not mark the end of this structural reform process. In order to reap the full benefits of euro adoption and to ensure sustainable convergence, this process should continue. This will involve noticeably reducing Malta’s high debt ratio, maintaining moderate wage developments that take fully into account labour productivity growth, and fostering labour participation.As you know, economic and monetary integration between countries with somewhat different characteristics and levels of development requires careful preparation. However, you have already reached this stage and your planning for the introduction of the euro is almost complete. Looking ahead the adoption of the euro will enhance your integration with all EU partners. Let me now offer two brief remarks in this respect: first about some of the effects that the euro has already had on euro area countries, and second about the functioning of the euro area and its greater resilience vis-à-vis external events. The economic and financial environment of the euro area is changing in many ways and the euro is having a beneficial impact. Euro area economies are gradually becoming more interdependent, as evidenced by the following facts: a. There is clear evidence of a significant increase in both intra- and extra-euro area trade in goods since the launch of the euro. Exports and imports of goods within the euro area rose from about 26% of GDP in 1998 to around 32% in 2006, and intra-euro area exports and imports of services increased from about 5% to almost 7% of GDP over the same period. The introduction of the single currency, as well as greater price and cost transparency, have promoted cross-border trade. The completion of a single market for services will also further facilitate trade in services. In addition, the rate of increase in extra-euro area exports and imports exceeded that in intra-euro area trade, rising from about 24% of GDP in 1998 to almost 33% in 2006. Over the same period, extra-euro area exports and imports of services grew from about 8% of GDP to almost 10%. External factors, such as more sustained growth in world GDP than in euro area GDP, rising global trade integration and a sizeable increase in trade with the new EU Member States, are also playing an important role.  b. Another area I would like to mention is foreign direct investment (FDI), which also includes merger and acquisition (M&A) activity. FDI accumulates over time and thus makes an important contribution to reshaping Europe. Intra-euro area FDI has grown considerably and is catching up with extra-euro area FDI. Between 1994 and 2004, the stock of intra-euro area FDI grew from almost 14% of euro area GDP to around 24%. On the other hand, the stock of extra-euro area outward FDI have grown somewhat less rapidly over the same period, rising from 22% to 30% of euro area GDP. In particular, EMU has been associated with a sharp increase in cross-border M&As of the manufacturing sector among euro area countries. Conversely, the service industry has thus far benefited less from European financial integration. This also illustrates that more has to be done to remove the existing barriers to trade in services. c. The euro is acting as a catalyst towards a single market in financial services. To illustrate this, I will give you just a few examples based on a set of ECB indicators on the level of integration in euro area financial and banking markets. Since the introduction of the euro, the cross-country standard deviation of interest rates in the interbank money market has plummeted. Back in January 1998, one year before the launch of the single currency, this deviation stood at more than 130 basis points for overnight rates, at over 100 basis points for one-month maturities, and at around 50 basis points for 12-month rates. Since January 1999, however, these differences have rarely exceeded one or two basis points. Furthermore, there is significant evidence that euro area corporations are taking advantage of the possibility to appeal to a broader universe of investors in order to raise funds. As a result, the euro corporate bond market has grown significantly since 1999, and has the potential to grow even further, judged by a comparison with the US. In 1999, the outstanding volume of bonds issued by non-financial corporations was just 3.9% of GDP in the euro area and 24.3% in the US; in 2006 it has increased to 12.5% but the US market is still one and a half times larger than in the euro area (21.1%).Between 1997 and 2005 euro area residents doubled their holdings of equity issued in another euro area country  -- as a share of their total portfolio of shares issued in their own country and elsewhere in the euro area -- to reach 29%. Instead, the share of euro area equity assets held outside the euro area remains much lower and increased only slightly. Hence, since the launch of the euro there has been a portfolio reallocation from holdings of domestic equities to holdings of equities issued elsewhere within the euro area. The share of long-term debt securities issued in the euro area and held by residents of other euro area countries has risen markedly. Euro area cross border holdings of long-term debt securities have risen from sligtly above 10% in 1997 to nearly 60% in 2005. By contrast, integration in retail banking has been slow so far, although it has picked up in the last two years. With some notable exceptions, much of the consolidation in the banking sector has been the result of domestic mergers; only in the last couple of years have cross-border banking mergers started to take place. In this respect, a number of euro area banks have considerably expanded their interests outside the euro area. However, cross-border activity within the euro area is still relatively limited, even though it is gaining in importance: a trend gradually increasing the level of competition and efficiency in the financial system.Further work is needed in order to achieve the goal of a single market for financial services. To this end, the ECB and the Eurosystem are actively involved in several initiatives that help foster financial integration, including: the launch of TARGET2, the new payment platform for the financial system, which is planned for the end of 2007; the European Commission’s Green Paper on Mortgage Credit in the EU. The mortgage credit market is an important segment of the banking and retail markets, with an outstanding volume of more than €4 trillion in the EU, which corresponds to around 40% of EU GDP. Euro area mortgage markets are not yet fully integrated, and I believe there is great potential for further integration in this respect; and the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) project, the aim of which is to integrate the market for retail payment services.  To sum up, these examples clearly show that the euro is having a remarkable impact, particularly on the financial market segments that are more directly affected by the single currency and monetary policy, such as fixed-income markets. Hence, interdependence within the euro area is becoming stronger.Before the launch of the euro, some experts feared that a single monetary policy would not suit a group of countries that were still diverse. But, after nearly a decade, the euro area has proved to be a success. The degree of synchronisation of business cycles across euro area countries has grown since the 1990s and remains high. There is evidence of a stronger common euro area cycle that accounts for a large part of the business cycle fluctuations.  a. Furthermore, however favourable the previously mentioned statistics are, they cannot fully capture the fact that the euro area has become more resilient to external developments than its individual member countries ever were before the launch of the euro. National economic policies have become better coordinated and the intra-European impact of external exchange rate turbulences has been of course totally removed.  b. Let me give you some specific examples of this increasing resilience: since 1999, the euro area has successfully weathered several common shocks, including the bursting of the dotcom bubble, the ripple effects of the terrorist attacks in the United States on 11 September 2001, the surge in global commodity prices and energy prices in particular, and the persistence of sizeable global imbalances. These shocks were very significant and evidence shows that they spread in similar ways across euro area countries. They have not played an important role in the dispersion of output growth and they have not contributed to economic divergence.  c.  Furthermore, we are currently witnessing a significant market correction with a reappraisal of risk, and episodes of high volatility and turbulences on various markets having threatened in particular the normal functioning of the money market. Through our liquidity operations in the recent period, the ECB and the Eurosystem took the appropriate decisions to help ensuring the orderly functioning of the money market. I am proud of the capacity we showed to judge correctly the situation of the market and to act decisively and rapidly when needed.  3. Ladies and Gentlemen, this now brings me to the final part of my remarks. As we have seen, the economic and financial environment is changing and euro area countries are gradually becoming more integrated and mutually interdependent. The effects of EMU have been beneficial, in line with the expectations of the 317 million people in the euro area and, more generally, the 494 million citizens of the EU. The euro area is experiencing low inflation and low macroeconomic volatility, both in historical terms and compared with other single currency areas, such as the United States. Let me remind you that over the eight and a half years since the creation of the euro, employment in the euro area has risen by almost 15 million people, compared with a rise of around 3 million in the eight and a half years preceding the adoption of the euro. European integration complements global integration. We are also reaping the benefits of a highly credible monetary policy strategy that is anchoring long-term inflation expectations at low levels. Several concerns that preceded the launch of the euro have successfully been dispelled. The euro area is now more resilient than its individual countries were before the launch of the euro. The fact that the euro area is now a very large economic area is accompanied progressively by a change in mentality. We need to think in terms of economic developments in the euro area as a whole, not just in our home countries. This has also implied a different type of economic management to the one used prior to 1999, including the peers’ surveillance of fiscal policies as called by the Stability and Growth Pact. We are also well aware that more must be done in several areas, such as raising the flexibility and adaptability of the individual euro area economies and paying close attention to cost competitiveness in the various economies. The achievements of EMU and our monetary policy support the reforms that are urgently needed in many countries. We look forward to welcoming you wholeheartedly into the euro area. Thank you very much for your attention.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great honour pleasur invit offer remark confer organis nation euro changeov committe central bank malta three month malta adopt euro januari signifi great mileston malta histori especi sinc malta join european union eu almost four year ago may proud malta success converg process fact pleas fruit cooper european central bank ecb central bank malta prepar changeov technic level particip governor bonello observ govern council sinc last juli prepar eu membership adopt euro spur broadbas reform process led restructur public enterpris sector liberalis trade regim reform help malta gradual reduc inflat signific shrink fiscal deficit moreov exchang rate maltes lira maintain central rate sinc currenc join erm ii may longterm interest rate declin adopt euro mark end structur reform process order reap full benefit euro adopt ensur sustain converg process continu involv notic reduc malta high debt ratio maintain moder wage develop take fulli account labour product growth foster labour particip know econom monetari integr countri somewhat differ characterist level develop requir care prepar howev alreadi reach stage plan introduct euro almost complet look ahead adopt euro enhanc integr eu partner let offer two brief remark respect first effect euro alreadi euro area countri second function euro area greater resili visàvi extern event econom financi environ euro area chang mani way euro benefici impact euro area economi gradual becom interdepend evidenc follow fact clear evid signific increas intra extraeuro area trade good sinc launch euro export import good within euro area rose gdp around intraeuro area export import servic increas almost gdp period introduct singl currenc well greater price cost transpar promot crossbord trade complet singl market servic also facilit trade servic addit rate increas extraeuro area export import exceed intraeuro area trade rise gdp almost period extraeuro area export import servic grew gdp almost extern factor sustain growth world gdp euro area gdp rise global trade integr sizeabl increas trade new eu member state also play import role b anoth area would like mention foreign direct invest fdi also includ merger acquisit m activ fdi accumul time thus make import contribut reshap europ intraeuro area fdi grown consider catch extraeuro area fdi stock intraeuro area fdi grew almost euro area gdp around hand stock extraeuro area outward fdi grown somewhat less rapid period rise euro area gdp particular emu associ sharp increas crossbord m manufactur sector among euro area countri convers servic industri thus far benefit less european financi integr also illustr done remov exist barrier trade servic c euro act catalyst toward singl market financi servic illustr give exampl base set ecb indic level integr euro area financi bank market sinc introduct euro crosscountri standard deviat interest rate interbank money market plummet back januari one year launch singl currenc deviat stood basi point overnight rate basi point onemonth matur around basi point month rate sinc januari howev differ rare exceed one two basi point furthermor signific evid euro area corpor take advantag possibl appeal broader univers investor order rais fund result euro corpor bond market grown signific sinc potenti grow even judg comparison us outstand volum bond issu nonfinanci corpor gdp euro area us increas us market still one half time larger euro area euro area resid doubl hold equiti issu anoth euro area countri share total portfolio share issu countri elsewher euro area reach instead share euro area equiti asset held outsid euro area remain much lower increas slight henc sinc launch euro portfolio realloc hold domest equiti hold equiti issu elsewher within euro area share longterm debt secur issu euro area held resid euro area countri risen mark euro area cross border hold longterm debt secur risen sligt near contrast integr retail bank slow far although pick last two year notabl except much consolid bank sector result domest merger last coupl year crossbord bank merger start take place respect number euro area bank consider expand interest outsid euro area howev crossbord activ within euro area still relat limit even though gain import trend gradual increas level competit effici financi system work need order achiev goal singl market financi servic end ecb eurosystem activ involv sever initi help foster financi integr includ launch target new payment platform financi system plan end european commiss green paper mortgag credit eu mortgag credit market import segment bank retail market outstand volum trillion eu correspond around eu gdp euro area mortgag market yet fulli integr believ great potenti integr respect singl euro payment area sepa project aim integr market retail payment servic sum exampl clear show euro remark impact particular financi market segment direct affect singl currenc monetari polici fixedincom market henc interdepend within euro area becom stronger launch euro expert fear singl monetari polici would suit group countri still divers near decad euro area prove success degre synchronis busi cycl across euro area countri grown sinc remain high evid stronger common euro area cycl account larg part busi cycl fluctuat furthermor howev favour previous mention statist cannot fulli captur fact euro area becom resili extern develop individu member countri ever launch euro nation econom polici becom better coordin intraeuropean impact extern exchang rate turbul cours total remov b let give specif exampl increas resili sinc euro area success weather sever common shock includ burst dotcom bubbl rippl effect terrorist attack unit state septemb surg global commod price energi price particular persist sizeabl global imbal shock signific evid show spread similar way across euro area countri play import role dispers output growth contribut econom diverg c furthermor current wit signific market correct reapprais risk episod high volatil turbul various market threaten particular normal function money market liquid oper recent period ecb eurosystem took appropri decis help ensur order function money market proud capac show judg correct situat market act decis rapid need ladi gentlemen bring final part remark seen econom financi environ chang euro area countri gradual becom integr mutual interdepend effect emu benefici line expect million peopl euro area general million citizen eu euro area experienc low inflat low macroeconom volatil histor term compar singl currenc area unit state let remind eight half year sinc creation euro employ euro area risen almost million peopl compar rise around million eight half year preced adopt euro european integr complement global integr also reap benefit high credibl monetari polici strategi anchor longterm inflat expect low level sever concern preced launch euro success dispel euro area resili individu countri launch euro fact euro area larg econom area accompani progress chang mental need think term econom develop euro area whole home countri also impli differ type econom manag one use prior includ peer surveil fiscal polici call stabil growth pact also well awar must done sever area rais flexibl adapt individu euro area economi pay close attent cost competit various economi achiev emu monetari polici support reform urgent need mani countri look forward welcom wholeheart euro area thank much attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en