Jean-Claude Trichet: Welcome message at the Annual General Assembly of the Manufacturers’ Association of Israel (MAI),21-01-2010,European Central Bank,ECB,997,"<p>Dear President Brosh, Ladies and Gentlemen,It is a pleasure for me to extend a welcome message to the Annual General Assembly of the Manufacturers’ Association of Israel. Your meeting is taking place in challenging times for the global, European and Israeli economies. Not surprisingly, Israel, as a very open economy, has been adversely affected by the global financial crisis. I also note that the Israeli economy has been quite resilient compared with other advanced economies. Israel can rightfully take pride in its recent economic performance, as well as in its achievements in economic development more broadly. Your country has close economic ties with Europe and is highly integrated into the global economy, so I think it would be useful to consider two questions: what is the outlook for the euro area economy; and what are the lessons of the global financial crisis?In the euro area, real GDP growth in the third quarter of last year returned to positive territory following five quarters of contraction. We expect the euro area economy to grow at a moderate pace in 2010. I should add, though, that the recovery process is likely to be uneven, and the outlook remains subject to high uncertainty.The upside and downside risks are broadly balanced. On the upside, there may be stronger than anticipated effects stemming from the extensive macroeconomic stimulus that has been provided by the authorities. Confidence may also improve further and foreign trade may recover more strongly than projected. On the downside, concerns remain as regards negative interactions between the real economy and the financial sector, which may be stronger or more protracted than expected. Renewed increases in oil and other commodity prices, the intensification of protectionist pressures and disruptive market movements related to the correction of global external imbalances remain other downside risks for economic developments in the euro area and beyond. Budget deficits in euro area countries must be reduced in a timely fashion to maintain confidence in public finances. Avoiding protectionism and disruptive market movements related to global imbalances will require a high degree of international cooperation among policy makers in advanced and emerging market economies. This brings me to my second point: what are the lessons of the financial crisis? Given the magnitude and the negative spillovers of the financial crisis on economic growth, on unemployment and on public finances, the citizens in our countries will not forgive us, if we fail to draw the right lessons from the crisis. In my view, there are three main lessons to be learnt:first, the need to build a more resilient financial sector,second, the need for fully coordinated measures to that end at the global level, andthird, the need for all systemic economies to embark on sound macroeconomic policies over the medium and long term.The epicentre of the crisis was located in the financial sector. Therefore the global financial system has to be made more resilient. Current efforts are under way, and the focus must now be on implementation. This concerns both financial regulation as well as oversight. In the EU, financial sector supervision is on the way to be strengthened in a two-pronged approach. A European System of Financial Supervisors will be established to permit better coordination among national authorities that oversee financial regulation. And a European Systemic Risk Board will be responsible for macro-prudential supervision. This new body will provide early warnings and issue recommendations to help prevent any renewed build-up of excessive risk in the financial system as a whole. These measures are not the end of the road on regulatory and supervisory reform, but, once implemented, a significant step forward. Although they are aimed at the financial sector, they will serve the economy as a whole, not least manufacturers. The manufacturing industry has a stake in a stable and resilient financial system. The crisis has revealed the very high level of interconnectedness of the global financial system. This constitutes a compelling case for very close international cooperation and solutions at the global level. There is an overwhelming need to implement global reforms in a coordinated fashion and along the same concepts, in order to preserve a global level playing field that would be solid and resilient. Finally, the crisis has again stressed the need for all policy-makers to contribute to financial, macroeconomic and price stability over the medium and long term. In the area of monetary policy, a sound legal and institutional framework for central banks promotes medium-term and stability orientation. The primary mandate of the ECB is to maintain price stability. To fulfil this mandate, the ECB and national central banks are institutions whose independence is firmly enshrined in law. This framework has been crucial to anchoring inflation expectations. It has also facilitated our task of maintaining price stability in the euro area, both at times of heightened inflationary pressures and at times of deflationary risks stemming from financial distress. I am convinced that a clear commitment to price stability by independent central banks has beneficial effects in countries and regions all over the world.Ladies and Gentlemen,Let me conclude by saying that business is, by its very nature, an act of trust, an expression of confidence. This is all the more true in the manufacturing industry, where decisions on investment are often made with a long time horizon. Confidence is exactly what has been short in supply during the crisis. Central banks have to be anchors of stability and confidence – and not only in turbulent times. When the crisis unfolded, they reacted swiftly and decisively. This was true worldwide, including in Europe as well as in Israel under the leadership of my colleague Stanley Fischer, with whom I enjoy an extremely confident and friendly relationship. By solidly anchoring expectations of price stability over the medium term, central banks are consolidating confidence and contributing to a sustainable recovery. I wish you a successful meeting and thank you for your attention.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",dear presid brosh ladi gentlemen pleasur extend welcom messag annual general assembl manufactur associ israel meet take place challeng time global european isra economi surpris israel open economi advers affect global financi crisi also note isra economi quit resili compar advanc economi israel right take pride recent econom perform well achiev econom develop broad countri close econom tie europ high integr global economi think would use consid two question outlook euro area economi lesson global financi crisi euro area real gdp growth third quarter last year return posit territori follow five quarter contract expect euro area economi grow moder pace add though recoveri process like uneven outlook remain subject high uncertainti upsid downsid risk broad balanc upsid may stronger anticip effect stem extens macroeconom stimulus provid author confid may also improv foreign trade may recov strong project downsid concern remain regard negat interact real economi financi sector may stronger protract expect renew increas oil commod price intensif protectionist pressur disrupt market movement relat correct global extern imbal remain downsid risk econom develop euro area beyond budget deficit euro area countri must reduc time fashion maintain confid public financ avoid protection disrupt market movement relat global imbal requir high degre intern cooper among polici maker advanc emerg market economi bring second point lesson financi crisi given magnitud negat spillov financi crisi econom growth unemploy public financ citizen countri forgiv us fail draw right lesson crisi view three main lesson learnt first need build resili financi sector second need fulli coordin measur end global level andthird need system economi embark sound macroeconom polici medium long term epicentr crisi locat financi sector therefor global financi system made resili current effort way focus must implement concern financi regul well oversight eu financi sector supervis way strengthen twoprong approach european system financi supervisor establish permit better coordin among nation author overse financi regul european system risk board respons macroprudenti supervis new bodi provid earli warn issu recommend help prevent renew buildup excess risk financi system whole measur end road regulatori supervisori reform implement signific step forward although aim financi sector serv economi whole least manufactur manufactur industri stake stabl resili financi system crisi reveal high level interconnected global financi system constitut compel case close intern cooper solut global level overwhelm need implement global reform coordin fashion along concept order preserv global level play field would solid resili final crisi stress need policymak contribut financi macroeconom price stabil medium long term area monetari polici sound legal institut framework central bank promot mediumterm stabil orient primari mandat ecb maintain price stabil fulfil mandat ecb nation central bank institut whose independ firm enshrin law framework crucial anchor inflat expect also facilit task maintain price stabil euro area time heighten inflationari pressur time deflationari risk stem financi distress convinc clear commit price stabil independ central bank benefici effect countri region world ladi gentlemen let conclud say busi natur act trust express confid true manufactur industri decis invest often made long time horizon confid exact short suppli crisi central bank anchor stabil confid turbul time crisi unfold react swift decis true worldwid includ europ well israel leadership colleagu stanley fischer enjoy extrem confid friend relationship solid anchor expect price stabil medium term central bank consolid confid contribut sustain recoveri wish success meet thank attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en