Jean-Claude Trichet: Remarks at the launch event for the educational games ‘€conomia’ and ‘Inflation Island’,08-12-2010,European Central Bank,ECB,495,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen, I’d like to welcome you all to this launch event here today – in particular the students and teachers who accepted our invitation. I also extend a warm welcome to all the other visitors, notably the ECCO colleagues and media representatives – and to ECB staff members who have worked on this project. In recent years, central banks have become important communicators and since its founding in 1998 the ECB has engaged on several avenues to broaden its outreach. The ECB was the first major central bank in the world to hold a press conference immediately after the Governing Council meeting to explain its monetary policy decisions. We publish a monthly bulletin for specialised audiences. We have educational videos on our website for the general public, we have games for children and of course we have our general publications. In 2010, our website was visited approximately 25 million times. Every year, around 13,000 people visit the ECB and we talk to them about the economy and our work. But there is always room for further improvement. And this is no time for complacency. We want to reach out to you – young people who have grown up in a networked, multimedia world. So we decided to develop games like these because their interactivity and playfulness could help enhance the learning experience. Today we are launching ‘€conomia’ and ‘Inflation Island’ on our website, and we will continue our work on such tools in the next few years. We expect the games to make this institution and its activities more accessible. The games are available in 22 European languages.You have just been playing against each other in '€conomia' and I hope you found it interesting and fun. But perhaps it wasn’t so easy to keep inflation low and stable, in line with our definition of price stability: less than 2%, but close to 2%. If that was the case, then the games have already served a purpose, because in real life it is challenging to keep inflation low and stable. Developing, producing and translating both games was quite a challenge as well. I’d like to thank everyone who has worked on the two games over the past year – the Directorate Communications, which is responsible for the project, ECCO members, experts from DG Economics and DG Market Operations, the language and software specialists. Let me now officially launch the games [by sending a tweet on Twitter and pushing a button to link of the game on the ECB’s Website]. Now it’s my pleasure to hand over the certificates and prizes. In equal 4th place are the European School of Frankfurt and the ISF International School Frankfurt [hands over the certificates]In third place is Lycée Français Victor Hugo [hands over the certificates and prizes]In second place is Friedrich-Dessauer Gymnasium [hands over the certificates and prizes]And the winner is Liebigschule [hands over the certificates and prizes]  Congratulations!Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen d like welcom launch event today particular student teacher accept invit also extend warm welcom visitor notabl ecco colleagu media repres ecb staff member work project recent year central bank becom import communic sinc found ecb engag sever avenu broaden outreach ecb first major central bank world hold press confer immedi govern council meet explain monetari polici decis publish month bulletin specialis audienc educ video websit general public game children cours general public websit visit approxim million time everi year around peopl visit ecb talk economi work alway room improv time complac want reach young peopl grown network multimedia world decid develop game like interact play could help enhanc learn experi today launch conomia inflat island websit continu work tool next year expect game make institut activ access game avail european languag play conomia hope found interest fun perhap wasn easi keep inflat low stabl line definit price stabil less close case game alreadi serv purpos real life challeng keep inflat low stabl develop produc translat game quit challeng well d like thank everyon work two game past year director communic respons project ecco member expert dg econom dg market oper languag softwar specialist let offici launch game send tweet twitter push button link game ecb websit pleasur hand certif prize equal th place european school frankfurt isf intern school frankfurt hand certif third place lycé françai victor hugo hand certif prize second place friedrichdessau gymnasium hand certif prize winner liebigschul hand certif prize congratul reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en