Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The challenges facing monetary policy,27-01-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,4299,"<p>From the start of the crisis in summer 2007, monetary policy has faced a number of challenges, linked particularly to the interaction between the development of the real economy and the turbulence in the financial markets. This has forced central banks to operate not only by way of conventional measures, in particular the key interest rate at which liquidity is injected into the system, but also via unconventional measures, designed to bypass the malfunctioning that has arisen in the financial system. The combination of these measures depends on the intensity of the crisis and on the ways it has developed in both the real and financial world. At a time of general uncertainty, central banks have had not only to try to anticipate events but also to use a more efficient combination of instruments to respond to those events. This challenge remains unchanged, even when looking ahead, given the persistent uncertainty about the gradual recovery in economic activity in advanced countries, including the euro area, and the situation on financial markets particularly in the markets for government securities.I would like to consider some of the challenges that central banks face at a time like the present, also drawing on the experience that we have gained in respect of similar cyclical phases. It should however be noted that this crisis, although it presents features that are similar to those in the past, is much greater in its nature and intensity. In terms of falling output and rising unemployment, it represents for many countries the most serious crisis since the war. As for the impacts on the banking system and on the risk for sovereign debtors, the industrial countries are confronted with a new situation. This obviously makes the conduct of monetary policy more complicated. I wish to emphasise that these remarks of mine should not be interpreted as specific indicators of the direction of the ECB’s monetary policy in the coming weeks and months. The monthly meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council takes place next Thursday, and therefore I will stick to the statements made public at the previous meeting. I would like to develop some conceptual aspects that characterise the analytical framework and the continuously updated flow of information underlying the monetary policy decisions. I will focus on four elements of this framework.The first aspect concerns an assessment of the economic situation in the period in which monetary policy has its effects, which is approximately 18-24 months. Making projections is always difficult, but especially so in a period of economic recovery after a crisis like the one we have just passed through. These estimates are based on economic models that were mainly drawn up with pre-crisis data, so it is unclear if the parameters and correlations are still valid. I’ll try to give some examples, without going into detail.An initial element of uncertainty is the productive potential, both in terms of level and growth. Can it be assumed that a crisis like the one we have been through had no effects on the potential level of economic activity and the growth rate? The implications for monetary policy are very different depending on the answer given to this question. The economic policy mistakes that risk being made if a wrong answer is given also differ. For example, if it is considered that the crisis has had a limited effect on both the level and potential growth rate of the economy, the output gap will be estimated to be very large and the risks of deflation may be considerable. This hypothesis justifies a very expansive monetary policy and fiscal policy, in order to fill the output gap as quickly as possible, with few risks that could have inflationary effects. In other words, the wider the estimated gap, the more reason for keeping the interest rate at very low levels, even close to zero, for an extended period of time, until the economic system returns to levels close to full employment. If the crisis had the effect of reducing economic potential in terms of level and growth, the accumulated gap is less than when compared with the previous case and will tend to fill up more quickly. In this case, if monetary policy remains accommodative for too long and does not adjust in advance, it risks being late and not countering inflationary pressures in time. If this delay materialises, the central bank then has to raise interest rates to a greater extent, with potentially recessionary effects.An overestimation of the potential growth rate of the economy also affects the ability of the central bank to properly calibrate the setting of its policy. In principle, as the economy gradually starts to grow above potential, and closes the output gap, the monetary stance should be gradually adjusted through a progressive increase in the interest rate, taking into account the lags with which monetary policy affects inflation and growth. Otherwise, with the same interest rate, an increase in the rate of growth in economic activity implies an easing of monetary conditions. This creates distortions in the allocation of resources, tends to inflate financial asset prices and create imbalances which are very difficult to put right once inflationary pressures emerge. As you can see, the setting of monetary policy after a serious crisis depends on the assessment of the crisis itself, of the cyclical and structural components and of the output gap. Currently, the estimates of the size of the output gap vary widely among the forecasting institutions, market participants and central banks. For example, the US Federal Reserve tends to see the crisis as having resulted in a reduction of the economic growth potential of the US, but not of its level, so that it estimates the gap to be significant. As far as we are concerned, however, we consider that both the level and pace of economic growth in the euro area have suffered from the crisis and the gap is contained. Our assessment is shared by most research institutions.Since the output gap cannot be measured, it can be estimated by various statistical and econometric techniques or by using various indicators to try to understand how big the output gap is.One such indicator is the unemployment rate. In economic models the level and rate of potential growth correspond to an equilibrium unemployment rate. Given the difficulty of measuring the output gap, some economists have proposed replacing it with a measure of the employment or unemployment gap. An expansionary monetary policy would be thus justified as long as unemployment did not begin to decline significantly toward its long-run level. However, this approach is not without risks. First, the unemployment rate depends not only on the economic growth rate but also on the characteristics of the labour market. Also, if the economic system suffers a real and permanent shock of a structural kind unemployment may remain high for a prolonged period, regardless of the development of economic activity. There is a risk in this case of linking monetary policy to labour market objectives that depend on other factors and other policies. Another indicator that is used to calibrate monetary policy in the light of economic development concerns money and credit. An acceleration of these financial variables may show that monetary conditions are particularly accommodative. The ECB attaches to these variables an important signalling value that in the past have made it possible to anticipate the trends underlying the economy, particularly as regards inflation. In summary, a major challenge for central banks concerns the assessment of the current economic situation, in terms of the relative strength of the recovery and the horizon within which this recovery may cause inflationary pressures. Examining the forecasting errors made by the main bodies in the past decade, the tendency to overestimate the growth gap and to underestimate inflation is notable. Such errors encourage the maintenance of very accommodative monetary conditions even when the economy starts to grow again. This was the case after the oil crisis in the mid-1970s, and during the past decade, in 2002-2004, as can be seen by comparing the estimates made for the output gap in those years and those reconsidered with hindsight. In particular if the real-time output gap estimate in 2002-2004 is compared with that carried out after several years we realise that it was initially overestimated, just as the deflation risks were overestimated, giving rise to an excessively accommodative monetary policy. The second challenge, related to the first, concerns the difficulty in estimating inflationary pressures and in forecasting them. In addition to the factors highlighted before, a new aspect has emerged in recent years, linked to the increasing importance of global inflation, tied to the commodity markets and products imported from emerging countries. The dimension attained by the emerging countries means that this phenomenon can no longer be ignored. Furthermore, the impact of inflation imported from these countries is likely to be of a different nature than in the past. In conceptual terms, inflation caused by imported products, especially commodities, can be ignored under three conditions. The first is that the increases are temporary. The second is that the imported price increases do not cause dragging effects on the price dynamics of domestic products. The third is that such increases do not have any effects on the inflation expectations of market participants. In the recovery phase in the 2000s, only the third condition was maintained, in part. Contrary to what was initially thought, commodity prices have steadily increased, not only in terms of their level but also in terms of growth rates. Domestic wages and prices of domestic products have not increased systematically, but this was partly the result of a reduction in the prices of manufactured goods imported from emerging countries related to the competitiveness gains in those countries and fixed exchange rates. Inflation expectations have remained anchored, but this required in the most acute phase of inflationary pressures, an adjustment in the interest rates. Looking ahead, the maintained dynamic in the emerging countries poses even greater challenges. We can expect that commodity, energy and food, will continue to grow in line with global demand, unless technological innovations are such that they lead to changes which offset the quotations. Unlike the previous decade, the process of reducing the prices of manufactured goods imported from developing countries seems to have ended, particularly in respect of products imported from China. The gradual appreciation of the exchange rates of these countries should further affect the prices of products imported from advanced countries. In summary, to a greater extent than in the previous decade, the strong dynamics of the rest of the world are likely to result in a higher inflation rate for imported goods, whether commodities or manufactured goods and services. This effect can be partly mitigated by the ability to shift the production of imported goods to new countries with lower labour costs, or even to bring production back to the advanced countries that have regained productivity, provided they manage to contain their cost dynamics. In any case, a permanent and repeated increase in the prices of imported products will tend to impact on inflation in the advanced countries, including the euro area. This effect occurs through two channels. The first is simply mechanical, by the weight of imported goods in the basket of goods and services purchased by households. For example, food and energy account for about 30% of the average shopping basket in the euro area. Assuming an average increase of these products by 4% a year, more or less in line with the rate of growth of the world economy (or long-term interest rates, according to the Hotelling rule), average prices in the euro area will increase by 1.2% only because of the effect of these products. It is therefore not a component that can be ignored, as it would be if core inflation were used as a reference. This concept is obviously losing its relevance in a global world. The second effect concerns the implications for prices of other products, making up 70% of the basket, and which include manufactured goods and services, some of which are imported and others are produced domestically. Assume, for simplicity’s sake, that these goods are only produced domestically. If the prices of these products grow at a rate of 2% per year, overall average inflation is 2.6%, exceeding the 2% objective of most central banks in advanced countries, including the ECB, which aims for inflation of below but close to 2% over the medium term. The central bank is therefore faced with two alternatives. The first is to revise the inflation rate objective upwards, taking account of imported inflation, or only to look at non-imported inflation and to ignore the rest. This strategy is complex because first and foremost it is not clear how much the imported inflation rate will be going forward, which is not under the control of the central bank. In addition, an upward revision risks bringing a loss of credibility and of being interpreted as a change in strategy. Moreover, a higher inflation objective implies an increase in inflation expectations, and thus of long-term interest rates, which must sooner or later be accompanied by an increase in short-term rates. Finally, if the inflation rate objective is increased it will not be easy to convince national market participants not to include this increase in their behaviour, including in wage demands. In a situation of high unemployment, this risk is limited, but gradually as the economic recovery gets under way the risk of second-round effects increases. Alternatively, the central bank may decide to maintain the inflation objective unchanged at 2% (or less). In this case, since the contribution of imported inflation is 1.2%, this means that domestic products must not increase by more than 1% per year. In other words, to be consistent with inflation at 2%, core inflation, or excluding food and energy, should be 1%. How do you get this result? By focusing monetary policy on domestic inflation of 1%. This can be accomplished through a moderation in costs and prices by producers. This does not necessarily mean a loss of purchasing power, if productivity increases at a pace comparable with imported inflation. However, if this does not happen, the only way of ensuring price stability is to restrict the purchasing power of wages. This requires that price increases for imported goods do not feed into wages and domestic prices.The numbers I have used are of course by way of illustration and should not be related to the current ones. The point I want to make is that if the growth gap continues between the developed and emerging markets, inflation imported from the latter cannot be ignored. Normally, higher inflation in the rest of the world should be compensated for by an exchange rate appreciation of the domestic currency vis-à-vis the rest of the world. But this only happens in the case of countries with comparable economic structures. In this case, however, the exchange rates of the advanced countries tend to fall compared with those of emerging countries, because of higher productivity growth in the latter group. These two effects, higher external inflation and depreciation, accumulate and lead to a loss in the terms of trade for the advanced countries. To avoid the second-round effects, it is necessary for the dynamics of costs and prices in advanced countries, including those in the euro area, to be significantly more contained than those of emerging countries. This factor should be incorporated into the conduct of businesses, trade unions, public authorities. Only by having domestic inflation significantly lower than 2% is it possible to avoid second-round effects on expectations and to maintain an economic growth rate in line with potential. Otherwise, monetary policy has to become more restrictive than it should be, which leads to slower growth, until the behaviours conform to the new standard. The third challenge faced by central banks of developed countries concerns the fragility of the financial system as it goes through a shake-out and an overall reduction in its leverage.The financial crisis has emerged due to the excessive financial leverage that has fuelled excessive consumption and speculative bubbles on different markets, particularly real estate. The return to a sustainable equilibrium depends on the restructuring of these excesses. This restructuring cannot be immediate, nor should it last too long. The adjustment cannot be immediate because a too rapid reduction in the leverage risks causing an excessive contraction of the assets and liabilities of financial institutions, with an impact on real activity. In other words, a credit crunch. However, the adjustment should not be too slow either, because prolonging an excessive level of leverage risks creating new imbalances and inducing financial institutions to take excessive risks again. In this adjustment process, monetary policy plays a decisive role, via conventional measures and exceptional ones. For example, the offer of unlimited liquidity through refinancing operations with the central bank has been essential to favour access to liquidity by many banks at a time when the money markets have not functioned properly. However if it lasts for extended periods, it may delay the necessary adjustments that should be implemented by the banks themselves, particularly by reducing their financial leverage and strengthening their capital. These delays could exacerbate the fragility of the sector itself. As for the traditional policies, we should not forget that the interest rates decided by the central banks affect, among other things, the value of the assets of financial institutions and their (re-)financing costs, and in particular the spreads that prevail in the money markets. In other words, the monetary authorities need to pay attention with their actions so that certain risks, such as liquidity risk, are not excessively compressed. Or so as not to induce financial institutions to take new excessive risks (risk-taking channel). It is also true, however, that an abrupt withdrawal of the liquidity support measures could cause excessive or too rapid adjustments by financial institutions. For example, sound financial institutions might have to sell significant parts of their assets in a relatively short time. This, in turn, could lead to an excessive depression of prices of financial assets (fire sales), resulting in a chain reaction on the budgets of other institutions that would see the value of their own assets diminished. As the recent financial crisis has taught us, a fall in the prices of financial assets could also create liquidity supply difficulties in the markets.The third challenge of monetary policy lies in the proper assessment of the adjustment process (de-leveraging) by financial institutions and the impact that the change in monetary policy may have on restructuring the imbalances. This challenge is even important for the maintenance of price stability, the ultimate objective of the European Central Bank. Do not forget, in fact, the essential role that the financial system plays in the transmission of monetary policy, which brings me to the fourth challenge.The fourth challenge concerns the effectiveness of the monetary policy transmission mechanism in the face of financial turmoil, particularly with regard to sovereign debts. This challenge is particularly acute in the euro area, where, unlike in the rest of the world, money is separate from public budgets. In the euro area, the public debt problems created by the crisis cannot be inflated away. The Treaty rules it out. The conduct of the ECB rules it out. The other method of adjustment is the consolidation of public finances via a primary budget surplus that helps stabilise and then reduce the weight of public debt on GDP. In all countries this objective must be achieved, not only in the euro area.Financial markets assess the risks associated with such adjustments to public finances, and the possibility that governments fail to implement them. In this case, a credit risk is taken into account, which directly affects the yields on government securities. Given the key role of government securities in the financial systems of different countries, the uncertainty and volatility related to these securities affects the respective economies. This is easily seen by examining the correlation between the risk premia on government bonds with those of banks and of non-financial companies in those countries. The differences in risk premia imply that monetary policy is not transmitted uniformly across the euro area.Monetary policy impulses are transmitted along the yield curve, up to higher maturities. This transmission is susceptible to disruption if a segment of the yield curve is not working properly. Moreover, government bonds can be used as collateral to obtain liquidity in money markets. The availability of collateral and the perception of market participants of the quality of the collateral itself influence the spreads prevailing in money markets, beyond the overnight rate at which central banks lend funds to the banking system. The money markets and their spreads are in turn crucial in determining whether the monetary policy impulses can be transmitted easily or not, and whether the transactions in money markets are surrounded by uncertainty or take place smoothly. It is in this context that the Securities Markets Programme (SMP) implemented by the European Central Bank has to be assessed. In May 2010, the tensions to which the Greek government bonds were subject generated uncertainty and a loss of confidence that has spread to the government bond markets of various jurisdictions in the euro area, almost to the point of paralysing them. The purchase of government securities by the European Central Bank aims to safeguard the monetary policy transmission mechanism, by giving support to the market segments considered as crucial for the financing of the financial sector and banks in particular. In this regard it is important to highlight how this differs from the purchase of government securities made in other circumstances, especially by some central banks in jurisdictions outside the euro area. For example, one of the objectives pursued by the Federal Reserve when implementing its quantitative easing programmes is to decrease long-term interest rates. In the case of the ECB, the effects of interventions on overall liquidity are sterilised.The SMP is one of those non-conventional instruments adopted in recent years, along with others such as those related to its fixed-rate refinancing operations of unlimited amounts for the banking system. Again, the goal is to remedy the malfunctioning of the money market connected to the increase in the counterparty risk premium that has led to a substantial decrease in volume and liquidity. The implementation of these non-standard measures, aimed at resolving the problems arising from the monetary policy transmission mechanism, presents at least two types of challenge. The first is the distinction that has to be made clearly between the adoption of these measures and the monetary policy stance, which must be determined on the basis of the price stability objective. This distinction is necessary to avoid ‘polluting’ the overall setting of monetary policy, which could affect the central bank's credibility and, ultimately, inflation expectations. The types of non-conventional operation implemented by the ECB allow an amendment to the monetary policy stance, in particular through a change in the interest rates, regardless of the non-conventional operations that are used. In other words, decisions about interest rates can be disconnected from the non-conventional measures. The final challenge is to prevent any non-standard measures which seek to remedy distortions emerging in financial markets from creating in turn further distortions, affecting in particular the behaviour of market participants.Let me offer a couple of examples related to what I mentioned earlier. The first concerns fixed-rate refinancing operations of unlimited amounts. As I said before, these operations enable the remedying of problems related to increased counterparty risk, affecting in particular weaker institutions. These steps provide liquidity to the markets, but do not solve the problem at its origin, which concerns the solidity of banks’ capital, on which the regulatory authorities must be vigilant. If refinancing operations are conducted over an extended period, there is a risk that the central bank would replace the market and the consolidation process of the system is delayed. In other words, some banks may become addicted to the liquidity provided by the central bank and have no incentive to sort out their own accounts and to recapitalise. In some countries this dependency can affect the entire banking system, whose difficulties reflect those of the sovereign issuer. To avoid this dependency we have to create disincentives for market participants to refinance excessively only from the Eurosystem, and incentives to return gradually to the market at competitive interest rates. The second example concerns the risk that the purchase of government securities on the secondary market under the SMP may create an incentive for the authorities of the interested countries to postpone the adoption of the measures necessary for fiscal consolidation or for the restructuring of the financial system. The experience of recent months has shown that governments tend to take unpopular decisions only under pressure from the markets. Action by the central bank that would eliminate such pressures would risk becoming counterproductive and creating moral hazard. Thus, there is a fine line between the goal of maintaining sufficient pressure on the authorities of the Member States and that of avoiding destabilising market dynamics that ultimately hinder the conduct of monetary policy. In conclusion, the three-year-old crisis has posed new challenges to monetary policy, in all countries, including the euro area. The best way to tackle it is to make use of the policy’s independence to pursue the goal, accounting for its actions in a transparent manner. Never have central banks been subject to such close scrutiny as now by the public and the markets. There's a reason. Too often in the past money was used to redistribute wealth and to make the weakest taxpayers pay an unfair tax, that of inflation. This must not happen again.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",start crisi summer monetari polici face number challeng link particular interact develop real economi turbul financi market forc central bank oper way convent measur particular key interest rate liquid inject system also via unconvent measur design bypass malfunct arisen financi system combin measur depend intens crisi way develop real financi world time general uncertainti central bank tri anticip event also use effici combin instrument respond event challeng remain unchang even look ahead given persist uncertainti gradual recoveri econom activ advanc countri includ euro area situat financi market particular market govern secur would like consid challeng central bank face time like present also draw experi gain respect similar cyclic phase howev note crisi although present featur similar past much greater natur intens term fall output rise unemploy repres mani countri serious crisi sinc war impact bank system risk sovereign debtor industri countri confront new situat obvious make conduct monetari polici complic wish emphasis remark mine interpret specif indic direct ecb monetari polici come week month month meet ecb govern council take place next thursday therefor stick statement made public previous meet would like develop conceptu aspect characteris analyt framework continu updat flow inform under monetari polici decis focus four element framework first aspect concern assess econom situat period monetari polici effect approxim month make project alway difficult especi period econom recoveri crisi like one pass estim base econom model main drawn precrisi data unclear paramet correl still valid ll tri give exampl without go detail initi element uncertainti product potenti term level growth assum crisi like one effect potenti level econom activ growth rate implic monetari polici differ depend answer given question econom polici mistak risk made wrong answer given also differ exampl consid crisi limit effect level potenti growth rate economi output gap estim larg risk deflat may consider hypothesi justifi expans monetari polici fiscal polici order fill output gap quick possibl risk could inflationari effect word wider estim gap reason keep interest rate low level even close zero extend period time econom system return level close full employ crisi effect reduc econom potenti term level growth accumul gap less compar previous case tend fill quick case monetari polici remain accommod long adjust advanc risk late counter inflationari pressur time delay materialis central bank rais interest rate greater extent potenti recessionari effect overestim potenti growth rate economi also affect abil central bank proper calibr set polici principl economi gradual start grow potenti close output gap monetari stanc gradual adjust progress increas interest rate take account lag monetari polici affect inflat growth otherwis interest rate increas rate growth econom activ impli eas monetari condit creat distort alloc resourc tend inflat financi asset price creat imbal difficult put right inflationari pressur emerg see set monetari polici serious crisi depend assess crisi cyclic structur compon output gap current estim size output gap vari wide among forecast institut market particip central bank exampl us feder reserv tend see crisi result reduct econom growth potenti us level estim gap signific far concern howev consid level pace econom growth euro area suffer crisi gap contain assess share research institut sinc output gap cannot measur estim various statist econometr techniqu use various indic tri understand big output gap one indic unemploy rate econom model level rate potenti growth correspond equilibrium unemploy rate given difficulti measur output gap economist propos replac measur employ unemploy gap expansionari monetari polici would thus justifi long unemploy begin declin signific toward longrun level howev approach without risk first unemploy rate depend econom growth rate also characterist labour market also econom system suffer real perman shock structur kind unemploy may remain high prolong period regardless develop econom activ risk case link monetari polici labour market object depend factor polici anoth indic use calibr monetari polici light econom develop concern money credit acceler financi variabl may show monetari condit particular accommod ecb attach variabl import signal valu past made possibl anticip trend under economi particular regard inflat summari major challeng central bank concern assess current econom situat term relat strength recoveri horizon within recoveri may caus inflationari pressur examin forecast error made main bodi past decad tendenc overestim growth gap underestim inflat notabl error encourag mainten accommod monetari condit even economi start grow case oil crisi mid past decad seen compar estim made output gap year reconsid hindsight particular realtim output gap estim compar carri sever year realis initi overestim deflat risk overestim give rise excess accommod monetari polici second challeng relat first concern difficulti estim inflationari pressur forecast addit factor highlight new aspect emerg recent year link increas import global inflat tie commod market product import emerg countri dimens attain emerg countri mean phenomenon longer ignor furthermor impact inflat import countri like differ natur past conceptu term inflat caus import product especi commod ignor three condit first increas temporari second import price increas caus drag effect price dynam domest product third increas effect inflat expect market particip recoveri phase third condit maintain part contrari initi thought commod price steadili increas term level also term growth rate domest wage price domest product increas systemat part result reduct price manufactur good import emerg countri relat competit gain countri fix exchang rate inflat expect remain anchor requir acut phase inflationari pressur adjust interest rate look ahead maintain dynam emerg countri pose even greater challeng expect commod energi food continu grow line global demand unless technolog innov lead chang offset quotat unlik previous decad process reduc price manufactur good import develop countri seem end particular respect product import china gradual appreci exchang rate countri affect price product import advanc countri summari greater extent previous decad strong dynam rest world like result higher inflat rate import good whether commod manufactur good servic effect part mitig abil shift product import good new countri lower labour cost even bring product back advanc countri regain product provid manag contain cost dynam case perman repeat increas price import product tend impact inflat advanc countri includ euro area effect occur two channel first simpli mechan weight import good basket good servic purchas household exampl food energi account averag shop basket euro area assum averag increas product year less line rate growth world economi longterm interest rate accord hotel rule averag price euro area increas effect product therefor compon ignor would core inflat use refer concept obvious lose relev global world second effect concern implic price product make basket includ manufactur good servic import other produc domest assum simplic sake good produc domest price product grow rate per year overal averag inflat exceed object central bank advanc countri includ ecb aim inflat close medium term central bank therefor face two altern first revis inflat rate object upward take account import inflat look nonimport inflat ignor rest strategi complex first foremost clear much import inflat rate go forward control central bank addit upward revis risk bring loss credibl interpret chang strategi moreov higher inflat object impli increas inflat expect thus longterm interest rate must sooner later accompani increas shortterm rate final inflat rate object increas easi convinc nation market particip includ increas behaviour includ wage demand situat high unemploy risk limit gradual econom recoveri get way risk secondround effect increas altern central bank may decid maintain inflat object unchang less case sinc contribut import inflat mean domest product must increas per year word consist inflat core inflat exclud food energi get result focus monetari polici domest inflat accomplish moder cost price produc necessarili mean loss purchas power product increas pace compar import inflat howev happen way ensur price stabil restrict purchas power wage requir price increas import good feed wage domest price number use cours way illustr relat current one point want make growth gap continu develop emerg market inflat import latter cannot ignor normal higher inflat rest world compens exchang rate appreci domest currenc visàvi rest world happen case countri compar econom structur case howev exchang rate advanc countri tend fall compar emerg countri higher product growth latter group two effect higher extern inflat depreci accumul lead loss term trade advanc countri avoid secondround effect necessari dynam cost price advanc countri includ euro area signific contain emerg countri factor incorpor conduct busi trade union public author domest inflat signific lower possibl avoid secondround effect expect maintain econom growth rate line potenti otherwis monetari polici becom restrict lead slower growth behaviour conform new standard third challeng face central bank develop countri concern fragil financi system goe shakeout overal reduct leverag financi crisi emerg due excess financi leverag fuell excess consumpt specul bubbl differ market particular real estat return sustain equilibrium depend restructur excess restructur cannot immedi last long adjust cannot immedi rapid reduct leverag risk caus excess contract asset liabil financi institut impact real activ word credit crunch howev adjust slow either prolong excess level leverag risk creat new imbal induc financi institut take excess risk adjust process monetari polici play decis role via convent measur except one exampl offer unlimit liquid refinanc oper central bank essenti favour access liquid mani bank time money market function proper howev last extend period may delay necessari adjust implement bank particular reduc financi leverag strengthen capit delay could exacerb fragil sector tradit polici forget interest rate decid central bank affect among thing valu asset financi institut re financ cost particular spread prevail money market word monetari author need pay attent action certain risk liquid risk excess compress induc financi institut take new excess risk risktak channel also true howev abrupt withdraw liquid support measur could caus excess rapid adjust financi institut exampl sound financi institut might sell signific part asset relat short time turn could lead excess depress price financi asset fire sale result chain reaction budget institut would see valu asset diminish recent financi crisi taught us fall price financi asset could also creat liquid suppli difficulti market third challeng monetari polici lie proper assess adjust process deleverag financi institut impact chang monetari polici may restructur imbal challeng even import mainten price stabil ultim object european central bank forget fact essenti role financi system play transmiss monetari polici bring fourth challeng fourth challeng concern effect monetari polici transmiss mechan face financi turmoil particular regard sovereign debt challeng particular acut euro area unlik rest world money separ public budget euro area public debt problem creat crisi cannot inflat away treati rule conduct ecb rule method adjust consolid public financ via primari budget surplus help stabilis reduc weight public debt gdp countri object must achiev euro area financi market assess risk associ adjust public financ possibl govern fail implement case credit risk taken account direct affect yield govern secur given key role govern secur financi system differ countri uncertainti volatil relat secur affect respect economi easili seen examin correl risk premia govern bond bank nonfinanci compani countri differ risk premia impli monetari polici transmit uniform across euro area monetari polici impuls transmit along yield curv higher matur transmiss suscept disrupt segment yield curv work proper moreov govern bond use collater obtain liquid money market avail collater percept market particip qualiti collater influenc spread prevail money market beyond overnight rate central bank lend fund bank system money market spread turn crucial determin whether monetari polici impuls transmit easili whether transact money market surround uncertainti take place smooth context secur market programm smp implement european central bank assess may tension greek govern bond subject generat uncertainti loss confid spread govern bond market various jurisdict euro area almost point paralys purchas govern secur european central bank aim safeguard monetari polici transmiss mechan give support market segment consid crucial financ financi sector bank particular regard import highlight differ purchas govern secur made circumst especi central bank jurisdict outsid euro area exampl one object pursu feder reserv implement quantit eas programm decreas longterm interest rate case ecb effect intervent overal liquid sterilis smp one nonconvent instrument adopt recent year along other relat fixedr refinanc oper unlimit amount bank system goal remedi malfunct money market connect increas counterparti risk premium led substanti decreas volum liquid implement nonstandard measur aim resolv problem aris monetari polici transmiss mechan present least two type challeng first distinct made clear adopt measur monetari polici stanc must determin basi price stabil object distinct necessari avoid pollut overal set monetari polici could affect central bank credibl ultim inflat expect type nonconvent oper implement ecb allow amend monetari polici stanc particular chang interest rate regardless nonconvent oper use word decis interest rate disconnect nonconvent measur final challeng prevent nonstandard measur seek remedi distort emerg financi market creat turn distort affect particular behaviour market particip let offer coupl exampl relat mention earlier first concern fixedr refinanc oper unlimit amount said oper enabl remedi problem relat increas counterparti risk affect particular weaker institut step provid liquid market solv problem origin concern solid bank capit regulatori author must vigil refinanc oper conduct extend period risk central bank would replac market consolid process system delay word bank may becom addict liquid provid central bank incent sort account recapitalis countri depend affect entir bank system whose difficulti reflect sovereign issuer avoid depend creat disincent market particip refin excess eurosystem incent return gradual market competit interest rate second exampl concern risk purchas govern secur secondari market smp may creat incent author interest countri postpon adopt measur necessari fiscal consolid restructur financi system experi recent month shown govern tend take unpopular decis pressur market action central bank would elimin pressur would risk becom counterproduct creat moral hazard thus fine line goal maintain suffici pressur author member state avoid destabilis market dynam ultim hinder conduct monetari polici conclus threeyearold crisi pose new challeng monetari polici countri includ euro area best way tackl make use polici independ pursu goal account action transpar manner never central bank subject close scrutini public market reason often past money use redistribut wealth make weakest taxpay pay unfair tax inflat must happen reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en