José Manuel González-Páramo: What securitisation for the future? - The collapse and revival of ABS markets,18-05-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,1763,"<p>Securitisation is an important feature of the financial markets. If properly regulated and supervised, it can fulfil a key role by redistributing risks and completing the financial system. In particular, for sectors that cannot access capital markets on their own, mainly households and SMEs, that often include the youngest and most innovative firms, securitisation is a particularly attractive tool, acting as a bridge between these borrowers and investors that could not otherwise directly gain these types of exposure. It can also help overcome credit supply constraints by taking concentrated credit risks off bank balance sheets and distributing them to a wider investor base. All in all, if properly used, as I said, securitization can be a powerful facilitator, if not a factor, of economic growth.Moreover, considering the large volume of bank debt maturing in the coming years, a well functioning wholesale market including asset-backed instruments will be important. The covered bond market is gaining ground as a funding tool, and hopefully will be able to replace some of the maturing debt. For this purpose, among others, the ECB has launched in 2009 the Covered Bond Purchase Programme (CBPP). Under the programme, over the 12-months from July 2009 to June 2010, the Eurosystem made outright purchases of covered bonds for a nominal value of €60 billion, as originally announced.Let me comment briefly on this program. It had four objectives:(a) facilitate a decline in money market rates,(b) ease funding conditions for credit institutions and firms,(c) encourage credit institutions to maintain or expand their lending to clients,(d) improve liquidity in the private debt market. During the months preceding the introduction of the program, activity in both primary and secondary markets for covered bonds in the euro area had been very subdued. In 2008, there was a clear trend towards smaller deal sizes and shorter maturities. Subsequently, the issuance volumes have returned to the levels observed before the crisis. Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell in her presentation yesterday showed evidence on the effects of the programme on the primary and secondary market. The program was also effective in lowering the overall funding cost for banks. At the same time, anecdotal evidence suggests there were positive effects also on the supply of bank credit, a key objective of the program. A more detailed analysis of these effects is presented in a recent ECB occasional paper.Going forward, the CBPP is not expected to be prolonged or expanded. However, the ECB and the Eurosystem will continue to work with the aim of revitalising different segments of the wholesale market, also by performing a catalyst role of privat initiatives (STEP, ABS, covered bonds). Having said that, it is important to consider that banks do not have an infinite capacity to issue covered bonds; therefore, covered bond and ABS issuance must complement each other. For this to happen, we need to reactivate the ABS market and regain investor confidence. Three leading principles should guide us in this respect: quality, simplicity and transparency.Let me start with transparency. Increased disclosure, either encouraged by the authorities or market-driven, should be combined with increased standardisation, where possible. In this respect, the Eurosystem has, as you know, launched a project on loan level data on ABS transactions, should these assets be used as collateral with us. ABSs represent 20 to 25% of the total collateral deposited by counterparties with the Eurosystem; the Eurosystem should thus be able to perform a proper assessment of risks. Also, loan-level information will allow rating agencies to improve their surveillance reports. Concerning simplicity, in the context of the loan level project we have developed and published different templates for ResMBS, ComMBS and SME CLO and are developing further templates on other asset classes. This is to my knowledge the first effort to standardise the ABS market in Europe, which will also bring a substantial increased amount of information to market participants. Let me emphasise that, independently of the market functionality and the consumer protection aspects, the ECB has a clear institutional interest in an efficient securitisation market, due to its links with the implementation and the transmission of monetary policy. In order to reach our objective of price stability, the Eurosystem deals with a broad range of counterparties, using a broad range of assets. Our experience suggests that this operational “style”, that over time as become typical of the ECB, helps steer interest rates and signal the stance of monetary policy in an effective way, especially when market do not function perfectly. An ABS “sector without market”, that is one resting mainly on retained issuance, would not be consistent with an efficient transmission mechanism. Let me now move on to the four questions addressed to the panellists.First:Several factors explain the sudden stop we have observed. First, rating downgrades, backed by revised rating criteria and adverse credit trends, contributed to the negative sentiment. Second, SIVs and conduits, large investor in this market, virtually disappeared and are unlikely to re-emerge as in the past. During the crisis, investors concentrated more on their current portfolio and less on purchasing new assets on the primary market. There is still a large overhang of ABS assets on banks balance sheets today. In addition, credit risk concerns, price volatility and other risks have raised market skepticism towards ABS products. This is surprising, to some extent, because despite price volatility, higher spreads and rating downgrades, the credit performance of the underlying securitised assets in Europe has generally been good. There may be, therefore, an informational problem negatively affecting ABS reputation – a point raised also in the preceding panel. This is why increased disclosure and standardisation will be important. It could alleviate the asymmetric information between issuers and investors and also facilitate the distinction between good and bad products, also in the interest of better pricing. Second:I think it is important to distinguish between the primary and the secondary ABS market. Looking at indicative spreads, it seems that the secondary market has recovered slightly better than the primary market. Since the peak in spring 2009, spreads have narrowed considerably and many asset classes enjoy spreads below those before the Lehman Brothers collapse. The primary market, conversely, is lagging behind. At best, the recovery is fragmented across asset classes and jurisdictions in the euro zone. Over the last 18 months we have seen few newly issued ABS sold to investors, in few countries and concerning few assets classes, based mostly on auto loans and ResMBS. However, the trend, while still slow, is positive. Besides macroeconomic factors and general risk aversion towards ABS instruments, institutional factors could also play a role. Anecdotal information suggests that there is still a degree of uncertainty regarding the final outcome and effects of EU regulations. The current regulatory program in Europe [Capital Requirements Directive II or CRDII on retention rules and due diligence, CRDIII on re-securitisation and related higher risk-weights, along with the removal of trading book treatment for ABS assets, the Liquidity Coverage Requirement that treats ABS as illiquid products, and the revised MiFID], is often regarded by market participants as following a piecemeal approach, that may undermine incentives to long-term investments. The complexity of the issues that regulators are called to address can be a partial explanation. As the regulatory program continues to unfold in the coming months, it will be important to focus, on the side of regulators and market participants alike, on its overall logic and on the interconnections between its various sectoral components.Third:If financial innovation alwayd worked as textbooks tell us, then ABS would undeniably be one of the most efficient tools in the financial industry. By transforming illiquid assets to liquid or at least tradable ones, based on credit to borrowers typically without access to capital markets, selling and distributing risk to investors more capable of bearing it, the functionality and also the stability of capital markets should increase, almost by definition. But some of the basic premises of this reasoning proved wrong in light of experience. Risk transfer weakened a fundamental banking function, that of screening and monitoring credit risks. Complexity did the rest. The end result was not a better allocation of risk, but a generalised, or al least a widespread, unawareness of the existence of risk.What was also overlooked is that risk-transfer markets, however sophysticated, cannot eliminate risk, only diversify it and transfer it. Fundamental risks remain in the economy, regardless of financial engineering, and they may even become more systemic. This is the lesson we learned from the turmoil. In the future, it will be important to approach securitisation in a way that the welfare-improving and stability-enhancing aspects are better understood and attained.This leads to the final question: Some recent developments in the euro area over the last 18 months might indicate a viable securitisation design. We have seen securitisation activity mainly in countries with low sovereign credit risks. Investor demand has focused on prime, high quality collateral that exhibits low risks and good credit performance on the underlying assets. Only simple transaction structures with significant credit enhancement from originators with proven issuance experience and good reputation could be placed in the market. In addition, transparent structures regarding the allocation of cash flows seem to be preferred. Let me be clear: there is no single-bullet or magic solution to revive the securitisation market. Structured finance sums up a combination of diverse features such as different asset types, coupon profiles and interest rate determination techniques, and diverse maturity profiles. Securitisation can be used as a funding tool or as a credit risk transfer tool. Not least, it is built around a variety of legal regimes and market arrangements. Attaining a successful mix of all these elements requires steady action and a combination of initiatives, by both the private and the public sector. In order to restore sound securitisation markets, a broadening of the investor base in Europe will be needed. Restore investor confidence and potentially also “rebrand” securitisation will be key, in particular to attract new investors. As I argued, and as the recent trends demonstrate, more transparent, comparable and simple securitisation structures, including high quality underlying assets, will be needed. This will contribute to improve internal evaluation processes within investor firms, helping overcome the reputation risks that surround the ABS markets.This area of work should become a high priority also for the industry, as it is for us monetary authorities and for the European and national regulators. I am confident that our loan level data initiative on ABS will contribute to this. Industry initiatives with similar aims would also be very useful. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",securitis import featur financi market proper regul supervis fulfil key role redistribut risk complet financi system particular sector cannot access capit market main household smes often includ youngest innov firm securitis particular attract tool act bridg borrow investor could otherwis direct gain type exposur also help overcom credit suppli constraint take concentr credit risk bank balanc sheet distribut wider investor base proper use said securit power facilit factor econom growth moreov consid larg volum bank debt matur come year well function wholesal market includ assetback instrument import cover bond market gain ground fund tool hope abl replac matur debt purpos among other ecb launch cover bond purchas programm cbpp programm month juli june eurosystem made outright purchas cover bond nomin valu billion origin announc let comment briefli program four object facilit declin money market rate b eas fund condit credit institut firm c encourag credit institut maintain expand lend client d improv liquid privat debt market month preced introduct program activ primari secondari market cover bond euro area subdu clear trend toward smaller deal size shorter matur subsequ issuanc volum return level observ crisi gertrud tumpelgugerel present yesterday show evid effect programm primari secondari market program also effect lower overal fund cost bank time anecdot evid suggest posit effect also suppli bank credit key object program detail analysi effect present recent ecb occasion paper go forward cbpp expect prolong expand howev ecb eurosystem continu work aim revitalis differ segment wholesal market also perform catalyst role privat initi step ab cover bond said import consid bank infinit capac issu cover bond therefor cover bond ab issuanc must complement happen need reactiv ab market regain investor confid three lead principl guid us respect qualiti simplic transpar let start transpar increas disclosur either encourag author marketdriven combin increas standardis possibl respect eurosystem know launch project loan level data ab transact asset use collater us abss repres total collater deposit counterparti eurosystem eurosystem thus abl perform proper assess risk also loanlevel inform allow rate agenc improv surveil report concern simplic context loan level project develop publish differ templat resmb commb sme clo develop templat asset class knowledg first effort standardis ab market europ also bring substanti increas amount inform market particip let emphasis independ market function consum protect aspect ecb clear institut interest effici securitis market due link implement transmiss monetari polici order reach object price stabil eurosystem deal broad rang counterparti use broad rang asset experi suggest oper style time becom typic ecb help steer interest rate signal stanc monetari polici effect way especi market function perfect ab sector without market one rest main retain issuanc would consist effici transmiss mechan let move four question address panellist first sever factor explain sudden stop observ first rate downgrad back revis rate criteria advers credit trend contribut negat sentiment second siv conduit larg investor market virtual disappear unlik reemerg past crisi investor concentr current portfolio less purchas new asset primari market still larg overhang ab asset bank balanc sheet today addit credit risk concern price volatil risk rais market skeptic toward ab product surpris extent despit price volatil higher spread rate downgrad credit perform under securitis asset europ general good may therefor inform problem negat affect ab reput point rais also preced panel increas disclosur standardis import could allevi asymmetr inform issuer investor also facilit distinct good bad product also interest better price second think import distinguish primari secondari ab market look indic spread seem secondari market recov slight better primari market sinc peak spring spread narrow consider mani asset class enjoy spread lehman brother collaps primari market convers lag behind best recoveri fragment across asset class jurisdict euro zone last month seen newli issu ab sold investor countri concern asset class base most auto loan resmb howev trend still slow posit besid macroeconom factor general risk avers toward ab instrument institut factor could also play role anecdot inform suggest still degre uncertainti regard final outcom effect eu regul current regulatori program europ capit requir direct ii crdii retent rule due dilig crdiii resecuritis relat higher riskweight along remov trade book treatment ab asset liquid coverag requir treat ab illiquid product revis mifid often regard market particip follow piecem approach may undermin incent longterm invest complex issu regul call address partial explan regulatori program continu unfold come month import focus side regul market particip alik overal logic interconnect various sector compon third financi innov alwayd work textbook tell us ab would undeni one effici tool financi industri transform illiquid asset liquid least tradabl one base credit borrow typic without access capit market sell distribut risk investor capabl bear function also stabil capit market increas almost definit basic premis reason prove wrong light experi risk transfer weaken fundament bank function screen monitor credit risk complex rest end result better alloc risk generalis al least widespread unawar exist risk also overlook risktransf market howev sophyst cannot elimin risk diversifi transfer fundament risk remain economi regardless financi engin may even becom system lesson learn turmoil futur import approach securitis way welfareimprov stabilityenhanc aspect better understood attain lead final question recent develop euro area last month might indic viabl securitis design seen securitis activ main countri low sovereign credit risk investor demand focus prime high qualiti collater exhibit low risk good credit perform under asset simpl transact structur signific credit enhanc origin proven issuanc experi good reput could place market addit transpar structur regard alloc cash flow seem prefer let clear singlebullet magic solut reviv securitis market structur financ sum combin divers featur differ asset type coupon profil interest rate determin techniqu divers matur profil securitis use fund tool credit risk transfer tool least built around varieti legal regim market arrang attain success mix element requir steadi action combin initi privat public sector order restor sound securitis market broaden investor base europ need restor investor confid potenti also rebrand securitis key particular attract new investor argu recent trend demonstr transpar compar simpl securitis structur includ high qualiti under asset need contribut improv intern evalu process within investor firm help overcom reput risk surround ab market area work becom high prioriti also industri us monetari author european nation regul confid loan level data initi ab contribut industri initi similar aim would also use reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en