José Manuel González-Páramo: Monetary and fiscal policies in times of crisis,19-09-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,5717,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,Let me start by thanking the organizers for inviting me to this conference. These are exceptionally hard times for policymakers around the world, and probably the most exciting times for researchers. I am sure that the financial crisis will prove to be a source of inspiration for the economics profession in general and for economic policy analysis in particular. The economic literature provides useful insights into the nature and causes of the current crisis. I am thinking in particular of the literature highlighting the fragility of equilibria and the possibility of self-fulfilling prophecies. A literature that includes the seminal work of Diamond and Dybvig (1983) on bank runs, which has inspired a large number of papers dealing with financial crises like the present one. [2] Equally relevant has been the large literature on self-fulfilling sovereign debt crises, building on papers like Calvo (1988) and Cole and Kehoe (2000), as well as the literature on public debt sustainability and fiscal and monetary policy interactions, including Leeper (1991, 2011) among others. That said, while the literature provides important insights, actual decision making during the crisis, like in other exceptional circumstances, had to be based on practical experience and necessarily involved judgment.Furthermore, it is also clear that we cannot be content with the current state of economic analysis. The rich body of economic knowledge that has helped us rationalize the crisis ex post has not been equally helpful in foreseeing and avoiding it. Economic research has made significant progress since its origins. Yet, recent events have reminded us how far we are from the “end of economics”.This conference offers an example of the type of work that we should promote. As I understand it, the MONFISPOL project aims at contributing to the evaluation of macroeconomic policy by advancing the analysis of optimal fiscal and monetary policy in a monetary union such as the euro area. At the ECB, we enthusiastically welcome and promote this type of research. In my talk I will discuss the challenges that the current crisis has posed to policymakers, and central banks in particular. I will first try to give a brief account of the origins and evolution of the crisis, of the policy interventions and of what I think needs to be done in order to prevent the repetition of such events. I will then conclude by highlighting some of the issues that I think should be among the priorities in our research agenda.The first seven years of the euro area were characterized by stability, both internally as well as globally. Indeed these were the years that saw the emergence of a number of papers trying to make sense of the so-called “Great Moderation”: a phenomenon that started in the mid 1980s. The question then was “why did macroeconomic volatility decline?” Ben Bernanke (then Governor of the Federal Reserve Board) identified “three types of explanations [in the existing literature] … structural change, improved macroeconomic policies, and good luck” (Bernanke, 2004). Now, of course, the question is: why are those tranquil times over? Up until the summer of 2007, the relative stability of corporate-bond and sovereign spreads – interrupted only by mild turbulences during the dot-com crisis at the turn of the millennium – can be observed against the backdrop of widespread moderation in macroeconomic volatility. Chart 1 shows a snapshot of the relative calm, before the recent storm, for BBB corporate spreads for the euro area and the US as well as 10 year sovereign bond spreads (relative to the Bund) for a number of euro-area countries. To a large extent, the positive trend in macroeconomic growth and stability and the low and stable credit premia are closely related. The protracted period of tranquillity was abruptly brought to an end by the collapse of the US housing bubble and the subsequent implosion of the sub-prime mortgage market. In the early stages, the financial turmoil was circumscribed so that it was very difficult to assess its severity. Furthermore there was a widespread belief that the real economy, both in the US and in the euro area, was sufficiently strong to withstand the financial turbulence (ECB, 2011). This notwithstanding, the European Central Bank did not fall victim to complacency and promptly intervened in the money market with an injection of 95 billion euros when severe strains emerged in that market in August 2007. This was the first of a series of interventions aimed at securing liquidity in the face of an interbank market paralyzed by fear. Concerning these interventions, it is particularly worth mentioning the high degree of international coordination among central banks. Besides the simultaneous liquidity injections in domestic currencies that took place in many advanced economies, the ECB was able also to rapidly provide ample liquidity in dollars thanks to swap agreements with the Federal Reserve. [3]Despite these unprecedented interventions, and similar measures implemented in the US, in October 2008 Lehman Brothers collapsed wrecking havoc on international financial markets and the world economy. The spiralling of the crisis is evident if we look at the Libor-OIS and Euribor-OIS spreads in Chart 2.The ECB’s response to the crisis was swift and combined a mix of standard and non-standard monetary policy measures. As regards the former, official interest rates were cut in a sequence of steps, bringing the main refinancing rate from 4.25% to 1% within a span of 6 months. The first of these reductions – on October 8, 2008 – was part of a concerted move with other major central banks. In order to meet banks’ increased demand for liquidity and to reduce uncertainty, a number of non-standard measures, which we have characterised as our “enhanced credit support” policy, were adopted. The most important of these have been the fixed-rate full-allotment policy, the introduction of additional and new long-term refinancing operations and the extension of the list of collateral eligible for monetary policy operations. By allowing banks to continue rolling-over their short and medium-term financing, the liquidity provision of the ECB avoided a fire-sale of assets. Like various other central banks, the Eurosystem has also embarked on outright purchases of securities, though on a relatively limited scale, in order to support the broader functioning of euro area financial markets. The Covered Bond Purchase Programme was initiated in July 2009. This programme was part of the “enhanced credit support” measures and its objective was to support a financial market segment that is particularly important for the longer-term funding of banks and the financing of the real economy in the euro area. The spill-over effects connected with the intensification of the financial crisis in September 2008 had led to a virtual shut down of the covered bond market, notwithstanding the high credit quality of this type of asset. In response, the Eurosystem purchased EUR 60bn of covered bonds between July 2009 and June 2010. Empirical research conducted by ECB staff suggests that the CBPP has been successful in achieving its goals (Beirne et al., 2011).Not least due to strong and timely action by central banks and governments, worldwide signs of stabilisation in financial markets emerged, with spreads returning to pre-Lehman levels and positive output growth resuming in the second half of 2009. In this respect, the ECB’s non-standard measures played a non-negligible role in supporting the euro area economy. Chart 1 also shows that sovereign credit spreads (relative to the German Bund) started to widen already in the early stages of the crisis as the market reassessed risk across the board. But sizable repercussions on the sovereign bond market are noticeable only after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, when the spread on Irish and Greek long-term government bonds soared above 250 basis points. This reflected the fact that, during the initial stages of the crisis, government guarantees for the financial sector and, more generally, the policy response to the crisis implied a transfer of risk from the private sector to the government sector. However, as deficits surged and the Greek government revealed a much larger deficit than previously thought, the attention focused more on the state of public finance. From then on, and in particular after the downgrading of Greek bonds by all the major rating agencies, the financial crisis that originated in the US turned into a sovereign debt crisis with a European epicentre.This escalation of events brought the crisis to a new dangerous level. While in the early phases concerns focused around the risk of a protracted recession the new phase raised concerns regarding the ability of some euro area countries to honour their debt obligations. The widening of sovereign bond spreads and the malfunctioning of securities markets in a number of countries impaired the smooth operation of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. In order to address this problem the Eurosystem initiated its Securities Markets Programme (SMP) by means of which private and public securities became eligible for outright purchase by the Eurosystem. A key distinguishing feature of asset purchases made under the SMP is that their liquidity impact has been sterilised through the conduct of weekly liquidity absorbing operations. Overall, there has been no net injection of central bank liquidity to the market as a consequence of these operations. These measures and their objectives are therefore fundamentally different from quantitative easing. For the ECB, non-standard measures have always been seen as a means of coping with abnormal functioning of some key markets, which, if unaddressed, would have posed problems for the effective transmission of monetary policy. This implies that, standard and non-standard measures are seen as complements, not substitutes. We have never chosen non-standard measures as alternatives or substitutes for changes in official interest rates. Indeed our standard and non-standard measures were implemented in parallel. This so-called separation principle is illustrated by the rate increases in the first half of 2011 in a context of stable or reinforced liquidity measures.These measures seemed to produce positive effects in the early stages, when spreads stabilized and the market gave signs of increased confidence. Yet a slower than expected recovery and overstretched public finances have made investors and consumers retrench in the second and third quarters of 2011, with spreads widening again and for an even larger group of countries in the euro area, reaching over 2000 basis points for Greece. In order to diffuse tensions in the euro area secondary sovereign bond market, the ECB, in its 7 August statement, indicated that it would resume its Securities Markets Programme. Importantly, this statement was made following the announcement of new fiscal and structural policy measures by the Italian and Spanish governments. Against this background, it is clear that what needs to be explained is how we went from historically tranquil times to the worst financial crisis since World War II and, eventually, to an equally severe sovereign debt crisis. Was it sheer bad luck? Or can we detect the seeds of the crisis in policies and structural changes that had taken place before? And if so, what needs to be changed?It would be foolish to argue that what we have experienced in the last four years is the sole result of an exceptionally large adverse shock. Major structural changes in financial markets gave life to a gigantic securitization market which allowed financial intermediaries to diversify their portfolios and, hence, to reduce their exposure to risk. Or so market participants liked to believe. As in the case of collateralized mortgage obligations (CMOs) and credit default swaps on CMOs and CDOs, many securitised products had an unknown or very uncertain risk profile due to the novelty of the financial products and the lack of data. The systemic risk associated with these assets was naively underpriced, and the consequence was an excessive exposure to risk.Such mechanism has been captured in a recent model by Boz and Mendoza (2011). They show that if investors have imperfect information on the risk profile of assets, and have to learn over time these characteristics, boom-bust cycles can easily emerge. In particular, after a positive shock that increases the availability of credit (e.g. financial innovation), financially constrained investors must assess the riskiness of the new environment: i.e. whether they are short lived or sufficiently persistent to warrant an increase in leverage. Given the limited information available on the new environment, mis-pricing of risk is very likely. The materialization of the underlying, yet mis-priced risk (like the widespread losses in the sub-prime mortgage market) in an environment of over-leveraged investors could have negative consequences via the sudden deterioration of investors’ balance sheets, and hence of their collateral.In a similar spirit Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2010) and Brunnermeier, Eisenbach and Sannikov (2011) emphasize the role of occasionally binding credit constraints in generating sudden contractions. They argue that in normal times (under moderate risk) borrowers are not limited by the value of their collateral. Only when risk increases and, hence, also the likelihood of hitting the borrowing constraint, borrowers will start liquidating their assets in order to increase their safety buffer. This can lead to fire-sales of assets, which will in turn lead to a deterioration of collateral values and set in motion a vicious spiral. Most interestingly their analysis emphasizes the role of liquidity risk (as opposed to credit risk): the more illiquid is the asset the larger is the price effect of fire-sales. An initial increase of risk, that generates margin calls or increased haircuts, will lead to larger asset-price falls the more illiquid are these assets. For these reasons, financial intermediaries play a key role in this environment. On the one hand they increase stability by providing liquidity-transformation services. On the other hand, when their net-worth deteriorates, their ability to provide liquidity (inside money) is impaired increasing the value of outside (central-bank) money. As the money multiplier shrinks, “Fisherian deflation” sets in worsening the debt burden of borrowers and, hence, further amplifying the contraction. Regrettably, the diversification delusion discussed in Boz and Mendoza and the understatement of the liquidity-risk channel in Brunnermeier et al. affected investors as well as policymakers and regulators. Indeed this same literature tells us that there can be ample scope for welfare improvements through economic policy. The fundamental reason for this public role is that private agents, typically, are not large enough players to internalize the general equilibrium – or even market specific – consequences of their portfolio decisions (as in the case of fire sales). These results warrant ample liquidity injections by central banks and underpin the current wave of regulatory reforms undertaken in the European Union as well as in other major economies. Among these reforms, it is important to mention in particular the new Basel Accord (Basel III) on banks’ capital adequacy which is consistent with the idea of Brunnermeier et al. that critical reductions in banks’ capital can generate dangerous liquidity shortages. Equally important is the establishment of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) with macro-prudential oversight responsibilities over the financial system in the European Union, which directly relates to the limited ability of financial markets to internalize systemic risk.Another important lesson that has been learned, admittedly the hard way, is that it is very difficult, if at all possible, for the market to correctly price sovereign risk. Charts 1 and 3 offer a clear example of what I mean. In particular consider two of the most troubled economies, i.e. Greece and Ireland. The evolution of their public finances in the recent history leading up to the crisis is dramatically different (as Chart 3 shows), in large part reflecting the deep differences in their growth experiences. Up to the start of the crisis Ireland experienced a rapid fall in the debt-to-GDP ratio, while Greek public debt had been hovering around 100% of GDP for the whole period (even considering older un-revised figures). Yet both economies were paying virtually the same rate on their debt as Germany did, the main reason being that the exchange rate risk had been removed by the single currency. Furthermore the market might have also made the assumption that by being in a monetary union each member country now benefited from a collective euro area wide implicit guarantee over its government’s liabilities. But were those debt levels equally sustainable? Up to the crisis, the “Celtic Tiger” was seen as an example of good public finances, having reached a debt-to-GDP ratio of about 25% in 2007 from more than 80% in the mid 1990s. The seemingly healthy picture of the Irish economy concealed deep imbalances that constituted implicit liabilities for the government. The real estate and banking sectors swelled to disproportionate levels compared to the ability of the government to intervene in case of major disruptions. A similar picture is offered by Spain, although in a less dramatic way, where the housing boom was the main driver of growth. It is obviously extremely difficult for the market to be able to assess these implicit liabilities. This is a further reason why macro-prudential oversight by public institutions is crucial in order to mitigate the risks of systemic crises. With hindsight, we can say that the excessive compression of sovereign risk premia has been unfortunate as it removed an important disciplinary device for issuing countries. There is widespread agreement that a new set of rules for fiscal discipline must be introduced. As the ECB already pointed out at the time, it was regrettable that France and Germany breached the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) in November 2003 and that the European Council failed to initiate the Excessive Deficit Procedures. The reform of the SGP undertaken in 2005 has addressed a number of weaknesses of the of the original design, in particular by enhancing its economic rationale and by calling more effectively on member states to undertake fiscal adjustments. Nevertheless, as I have pointed out in 2005 (González-Páramo, 2005), the reform had serious shortcomings, as it introduced more explicit flexibility and room for economic judgement. In this way, in order to guarantee sustainability, the new pact required even more commitment by the member states to consolidate their public finances and to rigorously and consistently apply the new rules. In light of the current crisis, the next major challenge for the European Union will be to design rules that are at the same time credible, effective and enforceable.The recent Euro Plus Pact of March 2011 is an important step in the right direction. The ECB strongly supports the objectives of the pact, i.e. to foster competitiveness and employment, to contribute to the sustainability of public finances and to reinforce financial stability. The pact has been reinforced by the statement made by the Heads of State or Government of the euro area on 21 July 2011 (see also Trichet, 2011). In particular, it has been reaffirmed that fiscal consolidation is a primary goal of member states. In this regard all countries not under a programme will have to achieve a deficit below 3% by 2013 at the latest. Indeed countries that have experienced turmoil in their sovereign debt market have already taken unprecedented measures to ensure sustainability of public finances. The ECB will monitor these developments very closely, as sound public finances are a fundamental prerequisite for a credible and effective monetary policy.Allow me to dwell a little bit more on the sovereign debt crises and the challenges it poses to monetary policy. As mentioned earlier, the economic literature has long emphasized the intimate connection between fiscal and monetary policy. The relationship between monetary and fiscal authorities can be of two alternative types. The first is one of “dependence” – typically of the monetary authority on the fiscal authority. The second type is a relation of “mutual independence” with a well defined monetary policy mandate. The literature has shown that countries displaying more independent central banks also enjoyed lower average inflation rates (e.g. Cukierman, 1992 and Walsh, 2003, Chapter 8). As argued earlier, this set-up can deliver price stability and growth only if accompanied by clear and enforceable rules for the fiscal authorities. Ensuring this, as we know too well, is not a minor challenge. In the case of a monetary union among sovereign countries with independent fiscal authorities, the challenge is much bigger. In a monetary union the misbehaviour of one fiscal authority can be offset, at least partially, by the virtuous behaviour of other countries, and the more so the smaller is the economy that misbehaves. In the face of these free-riding incentives, the non-cooperative behaviour of the member states can generate unsustainable fiscal policies.A large number of papers have highlighted the challenges that come with the establishment of a monetary union among countries with independent fiscal authorities. We know, for example, that if there are no limits to non-monetary policies (e.g. fiscal policy), governments might have the incentive to pursue lax policies in the national interest, putting pressure on the central bank to increase inflation (Chari and Kehoe, 2008). This literature has long called for a strengthening of fiscal rules, but also for euro-area wide bank supervisory bodies in order to bypass dangerous incentives at the national level to tolerate imbalances in the domestic banking sector, with associated risks of contagion and systemic crises (Uhlig, 2002).Indeed, the current dire situation is the result of the lack of effective and enforceable rules, i.e. of the lack of a credible fiscal commitment. Before the crisis, after initial efforts to consolidate public finances, some governments have enjoyed increasingly feeble external pressures to put their own house in order, thanks mainly to favourable global economic conditions, and have reverted to unsustainable fiscal stances. Others have turned a blind eye on the domestic economic imbalances that were building up, mainly as a consequence of abundant credit, and enjoyed the delusion of sustainable growth. As the crisis unfolded, all those vulnerabilities materialised calling for supranational interventions. As I have mentioned earlier, some of these interventions involved the ECB, as in the case of (sterilized) purchases of sovereign bonds in the secondary market. These type of unconventional interventions can only be seen as exceptional measures which would not have been necessary in the presence of appropriate institutional arrangements and credible rules for fiscal authorities. In designing these rules and institutions, European legislators will find vast insights in the existing economic literature. Let me conclude with a “wish list” for economic research. As I have alluded to before, current generation economic models used at central banks were ill equipped to signal the mounting risks of a global recession. The two sides of the current crisis – credit markets and sovereign debt crises – originate from the excessive leverage of private and public agents and by the extreme under-pricing of risk by investors. The DSGE literature has made considerable progress in this direction in the last 10 years. Most of this literature builds on the idea of asymmetric information and agency problems in financial markets. [4] These models appeared at central banks quite some time before the crisis and their development has intensified since 2007. [5] The main lesson that we have learned from this literature is that financial frictions can generate considerable amplification and enhance persistence of aggregate shocks. They may also be a source of sizeable international spillovers. Unfortunately, though, all these models are solved using linear methods and completely lack the non-linearity that is crucial to explaining disproportionate effects of seemingly small shocks. Linearized models can explain the crisis, only ex-post, by hitting the economy with exceptionally large shocks. The model of Brunnermeier et al. that I have mentioned earlier is also based on the same type of financial frictions. Yet, by preserving the model’s non-linearity, it is able to generate endogenous time-varying risk and feedback-loops that can bring about boom-bust cycles from even modest shocks. Indeed we know that the nonlinearity implied by financial constraints can generate multiple equilibria, with the further possibility that non-fundamental shocks (so-called sunspots) can generate large economic fluctuations. In this regard, further research on non-linear solution techniques should have high priority in the economic profession’s research agenda.The current financial crisis has certainly offered strong arguments to convince the sceptics that financial markets must not be neglected. The crisis has also taught us that another usually neglected market, the money market, is claiming its right to belong in business cycle models. In order to assess the fragility of the financial market and the risk of a systemic crisis, we need models where the liquidity-transformation role of financial intermediaries plays an explicit part. Some of the models that I have referred to include financially constrained banks. Yet most of them abstract from liquidity issues. On the other hand, quite some progress has been made in the banking and finance literature – typically in partial equilibrium or highly stylized models – in characterizing the interbank market. For example Heider, Herova and Holthausen (2009) show that private information in the interbank market, where liquidity plays a central role, can generate different regimes, including turmoil and market breakdowns. Here too there is a high premium on incorporating these ideas into quantitative policy models. Some progress in this direction can be seen in recent work by Gertler et al. (2010), who show in a DSGE model how the monetary policy stance can influence portfolio decisions of financial intermediaries and, hence, their exposure to risk. This model has important policy implications as it incorporates the moral-hazard consequences of policy decisions and of regulatory reforms, like new capital requirements and other macro-prudential regulations. Another deficiency in standard models is the absence of a meaningful role for the fiscal authority. As argued above, modelling the interconnection between public finances and the economy is a very difficult task, as the sudden deterioration of public finances can often be ascribed to the materialization of implicit commitments, something which is very hard to quantify ex-ante. Yet we know that in order to design appropriate policy responses to crisis events we need to have accurate predictions of their likely macroeconomic impact, which in turn crucially depends on the state of public finances. An early description of the deep interdependence of monetary and fiscal policy was provided by Sargent and Wallace (1981). More than a decade later the debate centred around the so called “Fiscal Theory of the Price Level” (FTPL, see Sims, 1994). Most of the DSGE models used for monetary policy analysis either disregard completely the fiscal side or assume a “passive” fiscal policy and an “active” monetary policy (as Leeper would put it). This constellation is certainly of interest but, in light of the recent events and issues that I have described earlier, quite remote from reality. In improving our policy models we will certainly benefit from Leeper’s research agenda (see e.g. Leeper, 2010). We may also benefit from the same inescapable logic of the FTPL as far as the interconnection between monetary policy, fiscal policy and the risk of sovereign default is concerned (as pointed out recently by Uribe, 2006). This is a further example of how non-linear dynamics can play a crucial role. The literature on self fulfilling debt crises mentioned at the beginning of my speech and the related developments in the literature on exchange rate crises (Obstfeld, 1996) emphasize the importance of economic policy in determining the conditions under which self-fulfilling crises can occur. The level of public debt is often a key determinant of these conditions, as high levels of debt increase the cost of interest rate hikes and heighten the sensitivity of public finances to risk premia. Embedding these concepts in our policy models would allow us to assess changes in the risk of self-fulfilling crises and would give some quantitative guidance in designing the appropriate policy responses. Finally, the standard model is based on the assumption of perfectly and equally informed rational agents. As argued above, in the case of asset-backed securities, a decisive role was played by the limited knowledge of their risk profile (Boz and Mendoza, 2010). Many have described the origin of the financial crisis as the result of second-moment shocks. In particular market agents realized that their guesses on asset price correlations were wrong. The very evolution of the crisis has been characterized by enormous uncertainty. The increase in uncertainty froze markets and paralyzed consumers and investors (e.g. Bloom, 2009). Policy models displaying these features would be close to a holy grail for central bank’s policy analysis.All in all, there seems to be quite some ground to cover in macroeconomic modelling. Yet, the programme of this conference gives me further reasons to believe that it won’t be long before these wishes will be realized.Thank you for your attention.Bean, C. (2010), “Joseph Schumpeter Lecture: The Great Moderation, the Great Panic, and the Great Contraction”, Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 8, pp. 289-325.Beirne, J., Dalitz, L., Ejsing, J., Grothe, M., Manganelli, S., Monar, F., Sahel, B., Sušec, M., Tapking, J. and Vong, T. (2011), “The impact of the eurosystem’s Covered Bond Purchase Programme on the primary and secondary markets”, ECB Occasional Paper Series, No 122.Bernanke, B.S. (2004), “The Great Moderation”, Speech delivered at the meeting of the Eastern Economic Association, Washington, DC, February 20.Bernanke, B. S., andGertler, M. (1989), “Agency Costs, Net-Worth, and Business Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, Vol. 79, 14-31.Bernanke, B. S., Gertler, M. and Gilchrist, S. (1999) “The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford. Elsevier.Bloom, N. (2009), “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks”, Econometrica, Vol. 77, pp. 623-685.Boz, E. and Mendoza, E. (2010), “Financial innovation, the discovery of risk, and the US credit crisis”, NBER Working Paper No 16020. Brzoza-Brzezina, M., and Makarski, K. (2010). ‘Credit crunch in a small open economy’, National Bank of Poland Working Paper No. 75.Brunnermeier, M.K. and Sannikov, Y. (2010), “A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Sector”, unpublished.Brunnermeier, M.K., Eisenbach, T.M. and Sannikov, Y. (2011), “Macroeconomics with Financial Frictions: A Survey”, unpublished.Caballero, R.J. and Krishnamurthy, A. (2009), “Global Imbalances and Financial Fragility”, American Economic Review, Vol. 99, pp. 584-88.Calvo, G.A. (1988), “Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations”, American Economic Review, Vol. 78, pp. 647-61.Carlstrom, C. T., and Fuerst, T.S. (1997), “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations: A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis,” American Economic Review, Vol. 87, pp. 893-910.Chari, V.V. and Kehoe, P.J. (2008), “Time Inconsistency and Free-Riding in a Monetary Union Journal of Money, Credit and Banking”, Vol. 40, pp. 1329-1356.Cole, H.L. and Kehoe, T.J., (2000), “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises”, Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 67, pp. 91-116.Christiano, L. and R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2003), “The Great Depression and the Friedman-Schwartz Hypothesis,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 36, pp. 1119-1197 .Christiano, L.J., Trabandt, M. and Walentin, K., (2007), “Introducing Financial Frictions and Unemployment into a Small Open Economy Model”, Sveriges Riksbank Working Paper Series. No 214,.Cukierman, A. (1992), Central Bank Strategy, Credibility, and Independence: Theory and Evidence, The MIT Press.Darracq Pariès, M. and Notarpietro, A., (2008) “Monetary policy and housing prices in an estimated DSGE for the US and the euro area,” ECB Working Paper No. 974.Darracq Pariès, M., Kok Sørensen, C. and Rodriguez-Palenzuela, D. (2010), “Macroeconomic propagation under different regulatory regimes: Evidence from an estimated DSGE model for the euro area,” ECB Working Papers No 1251.Davig, T., Leeper, E.M. and Walker, T.B. (2011), “Inflation and the fiscal limit”, European Economic Review, Vol. 55, pp. 31-47.Diamond, D.D. and Dybvig, P.H. (1983), “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 91, pp. 401-419.Dib, A. (2010), “Banks, Credit Market Frictions, and Business Cycles,” Bank of Canada Working Papers, No 10-24.ECB (2011), “Patterns of euro area and US macroeconomic cycles – what has been different this time?”, Monthly Bulletin, May.Gerali, A., Neri, S., Sessa, L., Signoretti, F. (2008). “Credit and Banking in a DSGE model of the Euro Area,” Banca d’Italia Working Paper, No 740.Gertler, M., Kiyotaki, N. and Queralto, A. (2010), “Financial crises, bank risk exposure and government financial policy”, unpublished manuscript.Gorton, G.B. (2010), “Questions and Answers about the Financial Crisis”, NBER Working Paper No 15787.Hart, 0. (1975), “On the Optimality of Equilibrium when the Market Structure is Incomplete”, Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 11, pp. 418-443.Heider, F., Hoerova, M. and Holthausen, C. (2009) “Liquidity hoarding and interbank market spreads: the role of counterparty risk”, ECB Working Papers, No 1126.Leeper, E.M., (1991), “Equilibria under 'active' and 'passive' monetary and fiscal policies”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 27, pp 129-147.Leeper, E.M. (2010), “Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy”, NBER Working Paper No 16510. Lombardo, G. and McAdam, P. (2011), “Financial Market Frictions in a Small Open Economy for the Euro Area,” ECB Working Paper (forthcoming).Obstfeld, M., (1996), “Models of currency crises with self-fulfilling features,” European Economic Review, Vol. 40, pp. 1037-1047.González-Páramo, J.M. (2005), Speech delivered at the Conference on “New Perspectives on Fiscal Sustainability”, Frankfurt, 13 October, http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2005/html/sp051013.en.html.Sargent, T.J. and Wallace, N. (1981), “Some unpleasant monetarist arithmetic”, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly ReviewSims, C.A. (1994), “A simple model for study of the determination of the price level and the interaction of monetary and fiscal policy,” Economic Theory, Vol. 4, pp. 381–399.Townsend, R. M. (1979): “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State Verification,"" Journal of Economic Theory, 21(2), 265-293.Trichet, J.C., 2011, Statement on the decisions taken by the Euro Area Heads of State or Government at a press briefing on 21 July 2011, Brussels.Uhlig, H. (2002). “One Money, But Many Fiscal Policies in Europe: What Are the Consequences?”, CEPR Discussion Paper No 3296. Reprinted in Monetary and Fiscal Policies in EMU: Interactions and Co-ordination, edited by Marco Buti, pp. 29-56, Cambridge University Press, 2003.Uribe, M. (2006), “A Fiscal Theory of Sovereign Risk”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 53 pp. 1857-1875.Walsh, C.E. (2003), Monetary Theory and Policy, MIT Press, 2nd ed.[1]I would like to thank Giovanni Lombardo, Günter Coenen, and Frank Smets for their inputs to this speech.[2]Gorton (2010) has recently described the current financial crisis as a run involving the “shadow” banking system and the repo market.[3]In response to the most recent intensification of the crisis, the ECB, in coordination with the Federal Reserve, Bank of England, Bank of Japan and Swiss National Bank, decided on 15 September 2011 to conduct US-liquidity providing operations with a maturity of approximately three months, thereby yet again demonstrating its willingness to act rapidly in times of crisis.[4]This literature has been popularized by Bernanke and Gertler (1989), Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997) and Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999) in models of costly state verification (à la Townsend, 1969) and by Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) in models of incomplete contracts and collateral constraints.[5]One of the early contributions in this direction is Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (2003), which formed the basis for developing a rich DSGE model with financial frictions at the ECB. Related works developed at central banks include Christiano, Trabandt and Walentin (2007), Brzoza-Brzezina and Markarki (2010), Gerali et al. (2008), Darracq Pariès and Notarpietro (2008), Dib (2010), Darracq Pariès et al. (2010) and Lombardo and McAdam (2011).Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen let start thank organ invit confer except hard time policymak around world probabl excit time research sure financi crisi prove sourc inspir econom profess general econom polici analysi particular econom literatur provid use insight natur caus current crisi think particular literatur highlight fragil equilibria possibl selffulfil propheci literatur includ semin work diamond dybvig bank run inspir larg number paper deal financi crise like present one equal relev larg literatur selffulfil sovereign debt crise build paper like calvo cole keho well literatur public debt sustain fiscal monetari polici interact includ leeper among other said literatur provid import insight actual decis make crisi like except circumst base practic experi necessarili involv judgment furthermor also clear cannot content current state econom analysi rich bodi econom knowledg help us ration crisi ex post equal help forese avoid econom research made signific progress sinc origin yet recent event remind us far end econom confer offer exampl type work promot understand monfispol project aim contribut evalu macroeconom polici advanc analysi optim fiscal monetari polici monetari union euro area ecb enthusiast welcom promot type research talk discuss challeng current crisi pose policymak central bank particular first tri give brief account origin evolut crisi polici intervent think need done order prevent repetit event conclud highlight issu think among prioriti research agenda first seven year euro area character stabil intern well global inde year saw emerg number paper tri make sens socal great moder phenomenon start mid question macroeconom volatil declin ben bernank governor feder reserv board identifi three type explan exist literatur structur chang improv macroeconom polici good luck bernank cours question tranquil time summer relat stabil corporatebond sovereign spread interrupt mild turbul dotcom crisi turn millennium observ backdrop widespread moder macroeconom volatil chart show snapshot relat calm recent storm bbb corpor spread euro area us well year sovereign bond spread relat bund number euroarea countri larg extent posit trend macroeconom growth stabil low stabl credit premia close relat protract period tranquil abrupt brought end collaps us hous bubbl subsequ implos subprim mortgag market earli stage financi turmoil circumscrib difficult assess sever furthermor widespread belief real economi us euro area suffici strong withstand financi turbul ecb notwithstand european central bank fall victim complac prompt interven money market inject billion euro sever strain emerg market august first seri intervent aim secur liquid face interbank market paralyz fear concern intervent particular worth mention high degre intern coordin among central bank besid simultan liquid inject domest currenc took place mani advanc economi ecb abl also rapid provid ampl liquid dollar thank swap agreement feder reserv despit unpreced intervent similar measur implement us octob lehman brother collaps wreck havoc intern financi market world economi spiral crisi evid look liboroi euriboroi spread chart ecb respons crisi swift combin mix standard nonstandard monetari polici measur regard former offici interest rate cut sequenc step bring main refinanc rate within span month first reduct octob part concert move major central bank order meet bank increas demand liquid reduc uncertainti number nonstandard measur characteris enhanc credit support polici adopt import fixedr fullallot polici introduct addit new longterm refinanc oper extens list collater elig monetari polici oper allow bank continu rollingov short mediumterm financ liquid provis ecb avoid firesal asset like various central bank eurosystem also embark outright purchas secur though relat limit scale order support broader function euro area financi market cover bond purchas programm initi juli programm part enhanc credit support measur object support financi market segment particular import longerterm fund bank financ real economi euro area spillov effect connect intensif financi crisi septemb led virtual shut cover bond market notwithstand high credit qualiti type asset respons eurosystem purchas eur bn cover bond juli june empir research conduct ecb staff suggest cbpp success achiev goal beirn et al least due strong time action central bank govern worldwid sign stabilis financi market emerg spread return prelehman level posit output growth resum second half respect ecb nonstandard measur play nonneglig role support euro area economi chart also show sovereign credit spread relat german bund start widen alreadi earli stage crisi market reassess risk across board sizabl repercuss sovereign bond market notic collaps lehman brother spread irish greek longterm govern bond soar basi point reflect fact initi stage crisi govern guarante financi sector general polici respons crisi impli transfer risk privat sector govern sector howev deficit surg greek govern reveal much larger deficit previous thought attent focus state public financ particular downgrad greek bond major rate agenc financi crisi origin us turn sovereign debt crisi european epicentr escal event brought crisi new danger level earli phase concern focus around risk protract recess new phase rais concern regard abil euro area countri honour debt oblig widen sovereign bond spread malfunct secur market number countri impair smooth oper monetari polici transmiss mechan order address problem eurosystem initi secur market programm smp mean privat public secur becam elig outright purchas eurosystem key distinguish featur asset purchas made smp liquid impact sterilis conduct week liquid absorb oper overal net inject central bank liquid market consequ oper measur object therefor fundament differ quantit eas ecb nonstandard measur alway seen mean cope abnorm function key market unaddress would pose problem effect transmiss monetari polici impli standard nonstandard measur seen complement substitut never chosen nonstandard measur altern substitut chang offici interest rate inde standard nonstandard measur implement parallel socal separ principl illustr rate increas first half context stabl reinforc liquid measur measur seem produc posit effect earli stage spread stabil market gave sign increas confid yet slower expect recoveri overstretch public financ made investor consum retrench second third quarter spread widen even larger group countri euro area reach basi point greec order diffus tension euro area secondari sovereign bond market ecb august statement indic would resum secur market programm import statement made follow announc new fiscal structur polici measur italian spanish govern background clear need explain went histor tranquil time worst financi crisi sinc world war ii eventu equal sever sovereign debt crisi sheer bad luck detect seed crisi polici structur chang taken place need chang would foolish argu experienc last four year sole result except larg advers shock major structur chang financi market gave life gigant securit market allow financi intermediari diversifi portfolio henc reduc exposur risk market particip like believ case collater mortgag oblig cmos credit default swap cmos cdos mani securitis product unknown uncertain risk profil due novelti financi product lack data system risk associ asset naiv underpr consequ excess exposur risk mechan captur recent model boz mendoza show investor imperfect inform risk profil asset learn time characterist boombust cycl easili emerg particular posit shock increas avail credit e g financi innov financi constrain investor must assess riski new environ e whether short live suffici persist warrant increas leverag given limit inform avail new environ mispric risk like materi under yet mispric risk like widespread loss subprim mortgag market environ overleverag investor could negat consequ via sudden deterior investor balanc sheet henc collater similar spirit brunnermei sannikov brunnermei eisenbach sannikov emphas role occasion bind credit constraint generat sudden contract argu normal time moder risk borrow limit valu collater risk increas henc also likelihood hit borrow constraint borrow start liquid asset order increas safeti buffer lead firesal asset turn lead deterior collater valu set motion vicious spiral interest analysi emphas role liquid risk oppos credit risk illiquid asset larger price effect firesal initi increas risk generat margin call increas haircut lead larger assetpric fall illiquid asset reason financi intermediari play key role environ one hand increas stabil provid liquiditytransform servic hand networth deterior abil provid liquid insid money impair increas valu outsid centralbank money money multipli shrink fisherian deflat set worsen debt burden borrow henc amplifi contract regrett diversif delus discuss boz mendoza understat liquidityrisk channel brunnermei et al affect investor well policymak regul inde literatur tell us ampl scope welfar improv econom polici fundament reason public role privat agent typic larg enough player intern general equilibrium even market specif consequ portfolio decis case fire sale result warrant ampl liquid inject central bank underpin current wave regulatori reform undertaken european union well major economi among reform import mention particular new basel accord basel iii bank capit adequaci consist idea brunnermei et al critic reduct bank capit generat danger liquid shortag equal import establish european system risk board esrb macroprudenti oversight respons financi system european union direct relat limit abil financi market intern system risk anoth import lesson learn admit hard way difficult possibl market correct price sovereign risk chart offer clear exampl mean particular consid two troubl economi e greec ireland evolut public financ recent histori lead crisi dramat differ chart show larg part reflect deep differ growth experi start crisi ireland experienc rapid fall debttogdp ratio greek public debt hover around gdp whole period even consid older unrevis figur yet economi pay virtual rate debt germani main reason exchang rate risk remov singl currenc furthermor market might also made assumpt monetari union member countri benefit collect euro area wide implicit guarante govern liabil debt level equal sustain crisi celtic tiger seen exampl good public financ reach debttogdp ratio mid seem healthi pictur irish economi conceal deep imbal constitut implicit liabil govern real estat bank sector swell disproportion level compar abil govern interven case major disrupt similar pictur offer spain although less dramat way hous boom main driver growth obvious extrem difficult market abl assess implicit liabil reason macroprudenti oversight public institut crucial order mitig risk system crise hindsight say excess compress sovereign risk premia unfortun remov import disciplinari devic issu countri widespread agreement new set rule fiscal disciplin must introduc ecb alreadi point time regrett franc germani breach stabil growth pact sgp novemb european council fail initi excess deficit procedur reform sgp undertaken address number weak origin design particular enhanc econom rational call effect member state undertak fiscal adjust nevertheless point gonzálezpáramo reform serious shortcom introduc explicit flexibl room econom judgement way order guarante sustain new pact requir even commit member state consolid public financ rigor consist appli new rule light current crisi next major challeng european union design rule time credibl effect enforc recent euro plus pact march import step right direct ecb strong support object pact e foster competit employ contribut sustain public financ reinforc financi stabil pact reinforc statement made head state govern euro area juli see also trichet particular reaffirm fiscal consolid primari goal member state regard countri programm achiev deficit latest inde countri experienc turmoil sovereign debt market alreadi taken unpreced measur ensur sustain public financ ecb monitor develop close sound public financ fundament prerequisit credibl effect monetari polici allow dwell littl bit sovereign debt crise challeng pose monetari polici mention earlier econom literatur long emphas intim connect fiscal monetari polici relationship monetari fiscal author two altern type first one depend typic monetari author fiscal author second type relat mutual independ well defin monetari polici mandat literatur shown countri display independ central bank also enjoy lower averag inflat rate e g cukierman walsh chapter argu earlier setup deliv price stabil growth accompani clear enforc rule fiscal author ensur know well minor challeng case monetari union among sovereign countri independ fiscal author challeng much bigger monetari union misbehaviour one fiscal author offset least partial virtuous behaviour countri smaller economi misbehav face freerid incent noncoop behaviour member state generat unsustain fiscal polici larg number paper highlight challeng come establish monetari union among countri independ fiscal author know exampl limit nonmonetari polici e g fiscal polici govern might incent pursu lax polici nation interest put pressur central bank increas inflat chari keho literatur long call strengthen fiscal rule also euroarea wide bank supervisori bodi order bypass danger incent nation level toler imbal domest bank sector associ risk contagion system crise uhlig inde current dire situat result lack effect enforc rule e lack credibl fiscal commit crisi initi effort consolid public financ govern enjoy increas feebl extern pressur put hous order thank main favour global econom condit revert unsustain fiscal stanc other turn blind eye domest econom imbal build main consequ abund credit enjoy delus sustain growth crisi unfold vulner materialis call supran intervent mention earlier intervent involv ecb case steril purchas sovereign bond secondari market type unconvent intervent seen except measur would necessari presenc appropri institut arrang credibl rule fiscal author design rule institut european legisl find vast insight exist econom literatur let conclud wish list econom research allud current generat econom model use central bank ill equip signal mount risk global recess two side current crisi credit market sovereign debt crise origin excess leverag privat public agent extrem underpr risk investor dsge literatur made consider progress direct last year literatur build idea asymmetr inform agenc problem financi market model appear central bank quit time crisi develop intensifi sinc main lesson learn literatur financi friction generat consider amplif enhanc persist aggreg shock may also sourc sizeabl intern spillov unfortun though model solv use linear method complet lack nonlinear crucial explain disproportion effect seem small shock linear model explain crisi expost hit economi except larg shock model brunnermei et al mention earlier also base type financi friction yet preserv model nonlinear abl generat endogen timevari risk feedbackloop bring boombust cycl even modest shock inde know nonlinear impli financi constraint generat multipl equilibria possibl nonfundament shock socal sunspot generat larg econom fluctuat regard research nonlinear solut techniqu high prioriti econom profess research agenda current financi crisi certain offer strong argument convinc sceptic financi market must neglect crisi also taught us anoth usual neglect market money market claim right belong busi cycl model order assess fragil financi market risk system crisi need model liquiditytransform role financi intermediari play explicit part model refer includ financi constrain bank yet abstract liquid issu hand quit progress made bank financ literatur typic partial equilibrium high styliz model character interbank market exampl heider herova holthausen show privat inform interbank market liquid play central role generat differ regim includ turmoil market breakdown high premium incorpor idea quantit polici model progress direct seen recent work gertler et al show dsge model monetari polici stanc influenc portfolio decis financi intermediari henc exposur risk model import polici implic incorpor moralhazard consequ polici decis regulatori reform like new capit requir macroprudenti regul anoth defici standard model absenc meaning role fiscal author argu model interconnect public financ economi difficult task sudden deterior public financ often ascrib materi implicit commit someth hard quantifi exant yet know order design appropri polici respons crisi event need accur predict like macroeconom impact turn crucial depend state public financ earli descript deep interdepend monetari fiscal polici provid sargent wallac decad later debat centr around call fiscal theori price level ftpl see sim dsge model use monetari polici analysi either disregard complet fiscal side assum passiv fiscal polici activ monetari polici leeper would put constel certain interest light recent event issu describ earlier quit remot realiti improv polici model certain benefit leeper research agenda see e g leeper may also benefit inescap logic ftpl far interconnect monetari polici fiscal polici risk sovereign default concern point recent urib exampl nonlinear dynam play crucial role literatur self fulfil debt crise mention begin speech relat develop literatur exchang rate crise obstfeld emphas import econom polici determin condit selffulfil crise occur level public debt often key determin condit high level debt increas cost interest rate hike heighten sensit public financ risk premia embed concept polici model would allow us assess chang risk selffulfil crise would give quantit guidanc design appropri polici respons final standard model base assumpt perfect equal inform ration agent argu case assetback secur decis role play limit knowledg risk profil boz mendoza mani describ origin financi crisi result secondmo shock particular market agent realiz guess asset price correl wrong evolut crisi character enorm uncertainti increas uncertainti froze market paralyz consum investor e g bloom polici model display featur would close holi grail central bank polici analysi seem quit ground cover macroeconom model yet programm confer give reason believ won long wish realiz thank attent bean c schumpet lectur great moder great panic great contract journal european econom associ vol pp beirn j dalitz l ejs j groth m manganelli monar f sahel b sušec m tapk j vong impact eurosystem cover bond purchas programm primari secondari market ecb occasion paper seri bernank b great moder speech deliv meet eastern econom associ washington dc februari bernank b andgertl m agenc cost networth busi fluctuat american econom review vol bernank b gertler m gilchrist financi acceler quantit busi cycl framework handbook macroeconom ed j b taylor m woodford elsevi bloom n impact uncertainti shock econometrica vol pp boz e mendoza e financi innov discoveri risk us credit crisi nber work paper brzozabrzezina m makarski k credit crunch small open economi nation bank poland work paper brunnermei m k sannikov y macroeconom model financi sector unpublish brunnermei m k eisenbach m sannikov y macroeconom financi friction survey unpublish caballero r j krishnamurthi global imbal financi fragil american econom review vol pp calvo g servic public debt role expect american econom review vol pp carlstrom c fuerst agenc cost net worth busi fluctuat comput general equilibrium analysi american econom review vol pp chari v v keho p j time inconsist freerid monetari union journal money credit bank vol pp cole h l keho j selffulfil debt crise review econom studi vol pp christiano l r motto m rostagno great depress friedmanschwartz hypothesi journal money credit bank vol pp christiano l j trabandt m walentin k introduc financi friction unemploy small open economi model sverig riksbank work paper seri cukierman central bank strategi credibl independ theori evid mit press darracq pariè m notarpietro monetari polici hous price estim dsge us euro area ecb work paper darracq pariè m kok sørensen c rodriguezpalenzuela d macroeconom propag differ regulatori regim evid estim dsge model euro area ecb work paper davig leeper e m walker b inflat fiscal limit european econom review vol pp diamond d d dybvig p h bank run deposit insur liquid journal polit economi vol pp dib bank credit market friction busi cycl bank canada work paper ecb pattern euro area us macroeconom cycl differ time month bulletin may gerali neri sessa l signoretti f credit bank dsge model euro area banca d italia work paper gertler m kiyotaki n queralto financi crise bank risk exposur govern financi polici unpublish manuscript gorton g b question answer financi crisi nber work paper hart optim equilibrium market structur incomplet journal econom theori vol pp heider f hoerova m holthausen c liquid hoard interbank market spread role counterparti risk ecb work paper leeper e m equilibria activ passiv monetari fiscal polici journal monetari econom vol pp leeper e m monetari scienc fiscal alchemi nber work paper lombardo g mcadam p financi market friction small open economi euro area ecb work paper forthcom obstfeld m model currenc crise selffulfil featur european econom review vol pp gonzálezpáramo j m speech deliv confer new perspect fiscal sustain frankfurt octob http www ecb intpresskeyd htmlsp en html sargent j wallac n unpleas monetarist arithmet feder reserv bank minneapoli quarter reviewsim c simpl model studi determin price level interact monetari fiscal polici econom theori vol pp townsend r m optim contract competit market cost state verif journal econom theori trichet j c statement decis taken euro area head state govern press brief juli brussel uhlig h one money mani fiscal polici europ consequ cepr discuss paper reprint monetari fiscal polici emu interact coordin edit marco buti pp cambridg univers press urib m fiscal theori sovereign risk journal monetari econom vol pp walsh c e monetari theori polici mit press nd ed would like thank giovanni lombardo günter coenen frank smet input speech gorton recent describ current financi crisi run involv shadow bank system repo market respons recent intensif crisi ecb coordin feder reserv bank england bank japan swiss nation bank decid septemb conduct usliquid provid oper matur approxim three month therebi yet demonstr willing act rapid time crisi literatur popular bernank gertler carlstrom fuerst bernank gertler gilchrist model cost state verif à la townsend kiyotaki moor model incomplet contract collater constraint one earli contribut direct christiano motto rostagno form basi develop rich dsge model financi friction ecb relat work develop central bank includ christiano trabandt walentin brzozabrzezina markarki gerali et al darracq pariè notarpietro dib darracq pariè et al lombardo mcadam reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en