Jean-Claude Trichet: The process of European economic integration,21-09-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,3219,"<p>It is a great pleasure for me to be invited as a speaker to the Dialogue européen de la Fondation Jean Monnet pour l’Europe. Let me start by saying that we are today confronted with exciting challenges and unique historical developments. The enlargement of the European Union, currently including 27 countries and 494 million people with Romania and Bulgaria recently joining, is an exceptional endeavour. More historical developments can be observed in the euro area, which now comprises 13 countries and will expand to 15 in three months’ time as we are joined by Cyprus and Malta. It is a fact that economic integration has increased among the countries in the European Union. It is also true that further and deeper integration is needed and that the creation of the euro area, as well as EU enlargement and globalisation, highlights the need for flexible economies. In this sense, all policy-makers and social partners now have increased responsibilities. They must provide good management to ensure a well-functioning European Union characterised by flexibility, integrated labour, product and financial markets and disciplined fiscal policies. This leads me to the issue I would like to address today, namely the process of European economic integration. First, I would like to share with you some stylised facts on the features of the European Union’s and the euro area’s economic integration process. Second, I would like to look at some ideas regarding economic adjustment processes, particularly in the euro area. Finally, I would like to talk about Europe in a global context. Allow me to briefly elaborate on four main features of the process of economic integration in the European Union, and the euro area in particular.  i) First, economic integration has been reflected in a marked increase in intra-euro area trade in goods and services. Let me provide you with some figures. Exports and imports of goods within the euro area increased from about 26% of GDP in 1998, the year before the adoption of the single currency, to around 32% in 2006. Intra-euro area exports and imports of services increased from about 5% of GDP in 1998 to almost 7% in 2006. The continued deepening of the Single Market will further facilitate trade in services. As this interdependence within the euro area becomes stronger, the euro area is also becoming a more open economy with increasing extra-euro area trade. Extra-euro area exports and imports of goods rose from about 24% of GDP in 1998 to around 33% in 2006. Over the same period, extra-euro area exports and imports of services increased from about 8% of GDP to almost 10%. These developments clearly show that we are not witnessing the creation of a “fortress Europe”. On the contrary, European integration complements global integration.  ii) As a second feature, the introduction of the euro has contributed to financial integration which, in turn, improves the free movement of capital in the euro area. Financial integration enhances the efficiency of economic mechanisms, strengthens competition and raises the potential for stronger economic growth. For example, recent research by London Economics estimated the benefits of the integration of EU bond and equity markets to be around 1 percentage point of additional GDP growth over a ten-year period, or approximately €100 billion. [2] Financial integration is also crucial, as it enhances the smooth and effective transmission of the single monetary policy throughout the euro area. Despite some progress, further financial integration is particularly needed in a number of areas, including in retail banking. iii) Labour mobility constitutes the third feature I should like to mention. Lack of openness in some countries increases risks of wage pressures as labour markets tighten. Available evidence suggests that, overall, cross-border labour mobility is still limited in most parts of the European Union and we still have regulatory barriers across the European Union, including the euro area in respect of labour from Slovenia. This is in clear contrast to the situation in the United States.  iv) As a fourth and final feature, the degree of synchronisation or co-movement between the different cyclical positions across the euro area countries increased since the beginning of the 1990s. In other words, a large number of euro area economies now share similar business cycles. In addition, current inflation and output growth differences among euro area countries are relatively limited compared with the past. The differences are also similar to those observed across regions or states within the United States. The decline in inflation differentials has been impressive. At the beginning of the 1990s, the dispersion in inflation rates across the euro area countries was, on average, around 6 percentage points (standard deviation measured in unweighted terms). Last year, the inflation dispersion was only 0.7 percentage point. As to real GDP growth rates across the euro area countries, the dispersion, measured in terms of standard deviations, has been fluctuating around a level of 2 percentage points over the past few decades, with no apparent upward or downward trend. While some differences are temporary, others are of a more persistent nature. Let me stress that the sustained differences in economic growth or inflation rates between some euro area countries are absolutely normal in a monetary union, to the extent that they are related to catching-up phenomena. However, it is also true that persistent differentials which reflect structural rigidities are a concern. I will address this issue later. In sum, there is evidence of stronger economic integration among the countries in the European Union. The adoption of the euro has particularly contributed to this development by reducing information costs, enhancing price transparency and eliminating exchange rate risk between countries in the euro area. In this manner, the euro acted as a catalyst for the Single Market, within which goods, services, people and capital are to move freely. Nonetheless, a lot remains to be done, for instance, in order to increase services trade and labour mobility and to reduce structural rigidities.Let me now turn to adjustment processes whose smooth functioning is important in all EU countries but particularly in the euro area. Why is an efficient adjustment mechanism particularly important in the euro area? In a monetary union where national monetary and exchange rate policies are no longer available options, it is important to make sure that other mechanisms of adjustment to shocks function properly. This is needed to avoid a situation whereby a country or a region, for instance after experiencing a specific event or asymmetric shock, enters either into a period of protracted low growth and higher unemployment, or into a long period of overheating.There are many factors that can improve the resilience of the euro area economies to adverse shocks. But before addressing this issue, let me stress that the ECB’s single monetary policy contributes to the proper functioning of adjustment mechanisms within the euro area by ensuring price stability, i.e. by anchoring price stability in economic agents’ decisions. I believe that this is a very important contribution. In other words, the social partners, when agreeing on wage increases, and also national authorities, when preparing their budgets or designing policies in their fields of responsibility, should be, and, as a matter of fact, are fully confident that we, at the ECB and in the Eurosystem, will deliver price stability.Turning to other factors, well-designed structural reforms that enhance competition and foster flexibility in product and labour markets are particularly relevant for the proper functioning of the euro area. In this context, the Lisbon strategy is a fundamental and ambitious programme to draw Europe’s attention to the urgency of structural reforms. Such reforms will improve long-term growth prospects. They do so by affecting positively labour participation and by improving productivity growth through the promotion of innovation and technological change. In recent years, we have already seen the benefits of a number of structural reforms, with the creation of about 13 million new jobs since 1999. Economic flexibility can be promoted by removing the institutional barriers to flexible wage and price-setting mechanisms. Specifically, in a monetary union, most of the adjustment has to take place through national labour markets. Therefore, wage setting should appropriately reflect the different situations of sectors, of firms and of overall labour market conditions. Let me stress that social partners share responsibility for ensuring that wage settlements fully take into account the need to reduce unemployment and to enhance labour market access and employment. Moreover, governments should also be aware of the way in which wage setting for public servants can serve as a role model for the private sector. And social partners need to take into account the different conditions at the firm and sectoral level, internalising the repercussions of wage settlements on competitiveness and thus employment at their company and in their industry, sector or region. Sufficient wage differentiation would improve employment opportunities for less skilled workers and in regions or sectors with high unemployment. In this respect, it is clear that excessive wage regulations are undermining job creation, in particular for young and less qualified workers, as well as for all those who face problems entering the labour market. The proper functioning of adjustment through labour markets also requires the completion of the Single Market. In particular, all existing barriers to labour mobility within the EU and notably within the euro area must be removed. As to product markets, let me stress that it is also essential that the Single Market be deepened, particularly in services and network industries. Greater cross-border competition and a deeper integration of markets across all EU countries would contribute to lower prices and higher real wages. It would also enhance price flexibility, and thereby the adjustment processes in the individual countries.Another important market-based mechanism that can help to attenuate the impact of shocks in a country or region is well-integrated financial markets and readily available opportunities for the diversification of financial asset portfolios. This would reduce the dependence of households’ saving and spending decisions on economic and financial developments in their country or region. This mechanism is known as the “credit and risk-sharing channels”. In essence, it means that consumption is less dependent on movements in national output, first because consumers can borrow from international financial institutions which are active at the level of the euro area, and second because the financial wealth of households is less dependent on local conditions thanks to an internationally well diversified portfolio allocation. Moreover, more integrated financial markets give rise to greater competition, resulting in more favourable financing conditions for consumers and firms. To provide you with some figures, in the United States, over the period 1963-90, capital markets smoothed out 39% of the shocks to gross state product (the equivalent to GDP), the credit channel smoothed out 23% and the federal government, through the fiscal channel, 13%. Around 25% of the shocks were not smoothed out. Hence, financial markets and financial institutions contributed 62% to the absorption of idiosyncratic state shocks. We therefore see from the US example that the financial channel can be much more important than the fiscal channel. This is an additional reason for speeding up financial integration in Europe. [3] According to a more recent study, the level of integration in the euro area has been increasing, although it remains modest. It was found that in the countries that now make up the euro area (excluding Luxembourg), capital markets smoothed out about 10% of the country-specific shocks to GDP between 1993 and 2000. [4] National authorities can also make a substantial contribution to ensuring the proper functioning of adjustment mechanisms within the European Union by conducting well-designed fiscal policy. The best contribution fiscal policy can make to the proper functioning of the euro area is by being disciplined and medium-term oriented, fully in line with the orientations provided by the Stability and Growth Pact. Moreover, improving the quality of public finances can enhance business and growth conditions, while at the same time allowing a reduction in overall public spending at the national level. Indeed, available evidence points to the existence of significant inefficiencies in public spending both in the EU and in OECD countries. In other words, it would seem that public spending could be substantially reduced without a detrimental impact on the volume of output. Additionally, a more efficient public administration would also allow the indirect costs of public sector inefficiency, linked to financing through inappropriate taxation regimes, to be reduced. Let me finally mention the important issue of competitiveness. One of the most important market-based adjustment mechanisms in a monetary union works via changes in competitiveness. In the euro area, persistent losses in relative cost competitiveness necessarily translate, in the medium term, into a period of below-average growth and an abnormal level of unemployment. According to recent figures, the difference in the cumulated growth of unit labour costs for the total economy between the euro area countries with the largest and the smallest cost increases, respectively, was between 20% and 25% in the period 1998-2006.  In sum, structural reforms in the labour, product and financial markets together with sound fiscal policies are crucial to enable smooth adjustment processes in the European Union and particularly in the euro area. At the same time, differences in price competitiveness and in unit labour costs across the euro area economies need to be closely monitored, as they may imply major adjustments in the countries concerned in the years ahead.Economic integration and smooth adjustment processes are clear prerequisites for the efficient functioning of the European Union. All the more so because Europe is regularly confronted with various adverse events or shocks, for instance in the context of globalisation, which translates in particular into greater interdependence between our economies through an increase in cross-border transactions of goods, labour and capital. Let me briefly elaborate on this aspect.Globalisation is triggering major transformations all over the world, not only in Europe. For instance, globalisation has undeniably had an impact on the inflation process. Numerous channels have been identified in economic theory through which globalisation can influence the level of prices. Without doubt, globalisation and the associated rise in world trade have contributed to import price moderation, [5] notably in the manufacturing sector, which is primarily due to increased imports from low-cost countries. Furthermore, the widespread opening-up of emerging countries and of almost all former centrally planned economies has significantly increased the labour pool available, leading to dampening pressures on labour costs, especially for unskilled labour. Globalisation can also exert pressure conducive to lower inflation more indirectly, as increasing international competition may have limited the pricing power of domestic corporations. However, at the same time, the sudden emergence of fast-growing economies in the global economy is exerting upward pressure on prices for energy and raw material prices. [6] Regardless of the intensive research currently pursued in particular in academia, at central banks and at various international institutions, there still remains significant uncertainty about the aggregate role and impact of globalisation. Even though the net effect of these counterbalancing forces is mostly believed to have contributed towards reducing inflation, whether and how long this disinflationary effect will last in the future remains an open question.Ultimately, globalisation is an opportunity, not a threat. Globalisation provides much-needed solutions. For instance, it may allow increased labour inflows to the euro area, which, in certain sectors, would help to reduce bottlenecks in labour markets and hence ease wage pressures. In addition, globalisation may supply external capital in exchange of know-how. As a matter of fact, the euro area has become an attractive place for foreign direct investment (FDI). A breakdown of extra-euro area liabilities indeed reveals that inward FDI amounts to more than 27% of euro area GDP, against 22.5% for the United States. The euro area has received, proportionally to GDP, a similar amount of FDI as China, 27.3% for both economies, according to IMF statistics. A rising amount of FDI comes from the so-called BRIC group – including Brazil, Russia, India and China.In fact, contrary to what such protectionist thinking would suggest, EU integration and the adoption of the euro seem to make Europe fitter for globalisation. The single currency has supported the development and diversification of exports in the euro area countries, as mentioned earlier. The euro has also made a significant contribution to the process of opening up euro area financial markets. On the assets side, stocks of euro area assets held abroad have increased from less than 87% of GDP in 1999 to over 124% in 2005. On the liabilities side, the increase was also very substantial, from around 92% of GDP to 137%. The rise has actually been much less pronounced for the United States during the same period: US assets grew from 80% of GDP in 1999 to 90% today, and US liabilities increased from 91% to 110% of GDP. In other words, the euro area and the United States held roughly comparable assets and liabilities in 1999, but the euro area witnessed a more substantial increase since the start of Economic and Monetary Union.Finally, globalisation puts emphasis on the need for further reforms to raise the ability of Europe to adjust to the major changes taking place in the global environment. The implementation of such reforms should raise flexibility and lower the adjustment costs for European firms and workers facing the globalisation process. Raising competitiveness is the main condition for making globalisation a success for the European citizens.Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. The successful creation of the euro area and further economic integration within Europe has gone hand in hand with the integration of Europe within the global economy. In no way are we creating a “fortress Europe”. This is not our objective and is not in our interests. It is crucial to promote further economic integration and to enhance flexibility of the European economies. This would also enhance adjustment processes in Europe. As regards monetary policy, Europe can count on the European Central Bank and the Eurosystem to be faithful to their primary objective and solidly anchor inflation expectations in the euro area. As regards the elements of policy that do not depend on the central bank, I have touched on three crucial areas: disciplined fiscal policies, fully in line with the Stability and Growth Pact; structural reform policies, fully in line with the Lisbon Agenda and the completion of the Single Market; and appropriate monitoring of the relative cost competitiveness indicators.Thank you very much for your attention.[1] I should like to thank Malin Andersson for her input into this speech, Klaus Masuch and Hans-Joachim Klöckers for their helpful comments, and Philippe Leclercq, Katherine Brandt and Antonio Afonso for their additional contributions.[2] London Economics, “Quantification of the macroeconomic impact of integration of EU financial markets”, report to the European Commission, 2002.[3] See P. Asdrubali, B. Sorensen and O. Yosha, “Channels of interstate risk sharing: United States 1963-1990”, Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 111, 1996.[4] See S. Kalemli-Ozcan, B. Sorensen and O. Yosha, “Asymmetric shocks and risk sharing in a monetary union: Updated evidence and policy implications for Europe”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4463.[5] See Box 13 in the June 2007 issue of the Monthly Bulletin entitled “Is the downward impact of globalisation on import prices waning”.[6]  Furthermore, there are also other factors – independent of globalisation – that can help to explain the decline in global inflation, such as the rapid technological progress and structural reforms that both have helped to increase the growth potential of the economies and thus to facilitate price stability, greater budgetary discipline and finally “better” monetary policy, that have resulted in an enhanced credibility of central banks.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",great pleasur invit speaker dialogu européen de la fondat jean monnet pour l europ let start say today confront excit challeng uniqu histor develop enlarg european union current includ countri million peopl romania bulgaria recent join except endeavour histor develop observ euro area compris countri expand three month time join cyprus malta fact econom integr increas among countri european union also true deeper integr need creation euro area well eu enlarg globalis highlight need flexibl economi sens policymak social partner increas respons must provid good manag ensur wellfunct european union characteris flexibl integr labour product financi market disciplin fiscal polici lead issu would like address today name process european econom integr first would like share stylis fact featur european union euro area econom integr process second would like look idea regard econom adjust process particular euro area final would like talk europ global context allow briefli elabor four main featur process econom integr european union euro area particular first econom integr reflect mark increas intraeuro area trade good servic let provid figur export import good within euro area increas gdp year adopt singl currenc around intraeuro area export import servic increas gdp almost continu deepen singl market facilit trade servic interdepend within euro area becom stronger euro area also becom open economi increas extraeuro area trade extraeuro area export import good rose gdp around period extraeuro area export import servic increas gdp almost develop clear show wit creation fortress europ contrari european integr complement global integr ii second featur introduct euro contribut financi integr turn improv free movement capit euro area financi integr enhanc effici econom mechan strengthen competit rais potenti stronger econom growth exampl recent research london econom estim benefit integr eu bond equiti market around percentag point addit gdp growth tenyear period approxim billion financi integr also crucial enhanc smooth effect transmiss singl monetari polici throughout euro area despit progress financi integr particular need number area includ retail bank iii labour mobil constitut third featur like mention lack open countri increas risk wage pressur labour market tighten avail evid suggest overal crossbord labour mobil still limit part european union still regulatori barrier across european union includ euro area respect labour slovenia clear contrast situat unit state iv fourth final featur degre synchronis comov differ cyclic posit across euro area countri increas sinc begin word larg number euro area economi share similar busi cycl addit current inflat output growth differ among euro area countri relat limit compar past differ also similar observ across region state within unit state declin inflat differenti impress begin dispers inflat rate across euro area countri averag around percentag point standard deviat measur unweight term last year inflat dispers percentag point real gdp growth rate across euro area countri dispers measur term standard deviat fluctuat around level percentag point past decad appar upward downward trend differ temporari other persist natur let stress sustain differ econom growth inflat rate euro area countri absolut normal monetari union extent relat catchingup phenomena howev also true persist differenti reflect structur rigid concern address issu later sum evid stronger econom integr among countri european union adopt euro particular contribut develop reduc inform cost enhanc price transpar elimin exchang rate risk countri euro area manner euro act catalyst singl market within good servic peopl capit move freeli nonetheless lot remain done instanc order increas servic trade labour mobil reduc structur rigid let turn adjust process whose smooth function import eu countri particular euro area effici adjust mechan particular import euro area monetari union nation monetari exchang rate polici longer avail option import make sure mechan adjust shock function proper need avoid situat wherebi countri region instanc experienc specif event asymmetr shock enter either period protract low growth higher unemploy long period overh mani factor improv resili euro area economi advers shock address issu let stress ecb singl monetari polici contribut proper function adjust mechan within euro area ensur price stabil e anchor price stabil econom agent decis believ import contribut word social partner agre wage increas also nation author prepar budget design polici field respons matter fact fulli confid ecb eurosystem deliv price stabil turn factor welldesign structur reform enhanc competit foster flexibl product labour market particular relev proper function euro area context lisbon strategi fundament ambiti programm draw europ attent urgenc structur reform reform improv longterm growth prospect affect posit labour particip improv product growth promot innov technolog chang recent year alreadi seen benefit number structur reform creation million new job sinc econom flexibl promot remov institut barrier flexibl wage priceset mechan specif monetari union adjust take place nation labour market therefor wage set appropri reflect differ situat sector firm overal labour market condit let stress social partner share respons ensur wage settlement fulli take account need reduc unemploy enhanc labour market access employ moreov govern also awar way wage set public servant serv role model privat sector social partner need take account differ condit firm sector level internalis repercuss wage settlement competit thus employ compani industri sector region suffici wage differenti would improv employ opportun less skill worker region sector high unemploy respect clear excess wage regul undermin job creation particular young less qualifi worker well face problem enter labour market proper function adjust labour market also requir complet singl market particular exist barrier labour mobil within eu notabl within euro area must remov product market let stress also essenti singl market deepen particular servic network industri greater crossbord competit deeper integr market across eu countri would contribut lower price higher real wage would also enhanc price flexibl therebi adjust process individu countri anoth import marketbas mechan help attenu impact shock countri region wellintegr financi market readili avail opportun diversif financi asset portfolio would reduc depend household save spend decis econom financi develop countri region mechan known credit riskshar channel essenc mean consumpt less depend movement nation output first consum borrow intern financi institut activ level euro area second financi wealth household less depend local condit thank intern well diversifi portfolio alloc moreov integr financi market give rise greater competit result favour financ condit consum firm provid figur unit state period capit market smooth shock gross state product equival gdp credit channel smooth feder govern fiscal channel around shock smooth henc financi market financi institut contribut absorpt idiosyncrat state shock therefor see us exampl financi channel much import fiscal channel addit reason speed financi integr europ accord recent studi level integr euro area increas although remain modest found countri make euro area exclud luxembourg capit market smooth countryspecif shock gdp nation author also make substanti contribut ensur proper function adjust mechan within european union conduct welldesign fiscal polici best contribut fiscal polici make proper function euro area disciplin mediumterm orient fulli line orient provid stabil growth pact moreov improv qualiti public financ enhanc busi growth condit time allow reduct overal public spend nation level inde avail evid point exist signific ineffici public spend eu oecd countri word would seem public spend could substanti reduc without detriment impact volum output addit effici public administr would also allow indirect cost public sector ineffici link financ inappropri taxat regim reduc let final mention import issu competit one import marketbas adjust mechan monetari union work via chang competit euro area persist loss relat cost competit necessarili translat medium term period belowaverag growth abnorm level unemploy accord recent figur differ cumul growth unit labour cost total economi euro area countri largest smallest cost increas respect period sum structur reform labour product financi market togeth sound fiscal polici crucial enabl smooth adjust process european union particular euro area time differ price competit unit labour cost across euro area economi need close monitor may impli major adjust countri concern year ahead econom integr smooth adjust process clear prerequisit effici function european union europ regular confront various advers event shock instanc context globalis translat particular greater interdepend economi increas crossbord transact good labour capit let briefli elabor aspect globalis trigger major transform world europ instanc globalis undeni impact inflat process numer channel identifi econom theori globalis influenc level price without doubt globalis associ rise world trade contribut import price moder notabl manufactur sector primarili due increas import lowcost countri furthermor widespread openingup emerg countri almost former central plan economi signific increas labour pool avail lead dampen pressur labour cost especi unskil labour globalis also exert pressur conduc lower inflat indirect increas intern competit may limit price power domest corpor howev time sudden emerg fastgrow economi global economi exert upward pressur price energi raw materi price regardless intens research current pursu particular academia central bank various intern institut still remain signific uncertainti aggreg role impact globalis even though net effect counterbalanc forc most believ contribut toward reduc inflat whether long disinflationari effect last futur remain open question ultim globalis opportun threat globalis provid muchneed solut instanc may allow increas labour inflow euro area certain sector would help reduc bottleneck labour market henc eas wage pressur addit globalis may suppli extern capit exchang knowhow matter fact euro area becom attract place foreign direct invest fdi breakdown extraeuro area liabil inde reveal inward fdi amount euro area gdp unit state euro area receiv proport gdp similar amount fdi china economi accord imf statist rise amount fdi come socal bric group includ brazil russia india china fact contrari protectionist think would suggest eu integr adopt euro seem make europ fitter globalis singl currenc support develop diversif export euro area countri mention earlier euro also made signific contribut process open euro area financi market asset side stock euro area asset held abroad increas less gdp liabil side increas also substanti around gdp rise actual much less pronounc unit state period us asset grew gdp today us liabil increas gdp word euro area unit state held rough compar asset liabil euro area wit substanti increas sinc start econom monetari union final globalis put emphasi need reform rais abil europ adjust major chang take place global environ implement reform rais flexibl lower adjust cost european firm worker face globalis process rais competit main condit make globalis success european citizen ladi gentlemen let conclud success creation euro area econom integr within europ gone hand hand integr europ within global economi way creat fortress europ object interest crucial promot econom integr enhanc flexibl european economi would also enhanc adjust process europ regard monetari polici europ count european central bank eurosystem faith primari object solid anchor inflat expect euro area regard element polici depend central bank touch three crucial area disciplin fiscal polici fulli line stabil growth pact structur reform polici fulli line lisbon agenda complet singl market appropri monitor relat cost competit indic thank much attent like thank malin andersson input speech klaus masuch hansjoachim klöcker help comment leclercq katherin brandt antonio afonso addit contribut london econom quantif macroeconom impact integr eu financi market report european commiss see p asdrubali b sorensen o yosha channel interst risk share unit state quarter journal econom vol see kalemliozcan b sorensen o yosha asymmetr shock risk share monetari union updat evid polici implic europ cepr discuss paper see box june issu month bulletin entitl downward impact globalis import price wane furthermor also factor independ globalis help explain declin global inflat rapid technolog progress structur reform help increas growth potenti economi thus facilit price stabil greater budgetari disciplin final better monetari polici result enhanc credibl central bank reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en