Jürgen Stark: The economic crisis and the response of fiscal and monetary policy,08-06-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,6427,"<p>Following the default of Lehman Brothers in mid-September last year, the turmoil in financial markets which had started in August 2007 turned into a major financial crisis. Liquidity dried up, and credit flows to the economy slowed down. Problems in the financial system quickly spilled over to the real economy, and an adverse feedback loop between the real economy and the financial sector emerged. This has led to the most severe and synchronised global economic downturn for 80 years. The euro area has not been spared. Economic activity has declined sharply, and inflation is at its lowest level since the launch of the euro. Monetary and fiscal authorities across the globe have responded quickly and decisively to these extraordinary developments. In particular, against the background of rapidly receding inflationary pressures and risks, the Eurosystem has taken monetary policy and liquidity management measures that were unprecedented in nature, scope and timing. Since October last year we have reduced the interest rate on the main refinancing operations by 325 basis points. We have also provided unlimited liquidity support to the banking system in the euro area to maintain the flow of credit. Likewise, governments in the euro area have reacted swiftly to stabilise the financial system and to counteract the adverse impact of the financial crisis on the real economy. Looking ahead, both monetary and fiscal authorities will need to remain credible and effective, and to fulfil their respective responsibilities. In so doing, they will lay solid foundations for future economic recovery and long-term economic growth and job creation. The crisis has shown how important it is to have an independent central bank firmly committed to the objective of price stability. At the same time, governments must make a strong and credible commitment to a path of fiscal consolidation and thus comply with the Stability and Growth Pact. But they must also resist the temptation to further increase the size of the stimulus measures, as this could erode trust in the sustainability of public finances and undermine the effectiveness of the measures already adopted. In my presentation today, I would like first to analyse the economic outlook and then discuss in more detail the policy measures taken in response to the crisis. I will then consider their implications and the lessons to be drawn from the crisis for central banks and monetary policy. Let me begin with the assessment of the global economic situation. The turmoil in financial markets, which was triggered by a systematic under-pricing of risk, particularly in the US sub-prime mortgage market, has now developed into a fully-fledged financial and economic crisis at global level. While the world economy continues to face a severe and synchronised downturn, recent international business confidence indicators suggest that the pace of the decline in economic activity is slowing down somewhat. Most forecasters expect that the global economy is likely to recover in 2010, albeit at a gradual pace. The June 2009 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, which have just been published, are in line with this overall assessment. They are based on the assumption that the global economy outside the euro area will contract by 1.6% this year grow and by 2.1% in 2010.Nonetheless, the economic prospects remain fraught with uncertainty. Compared with a few months ago, overall risks to global economic growth have become more balanced. A stronger positive confidence effect than expected triggered by the monetary and fiscal policy measures could lead to a more sustained recovery in global demand and in global trade, and a quicker normalisation of financial market and credit conditions. Of course, if global policy actions fail to strike an appropriate balance between economic stimulus and longer-term sustainability, financial market conditions could turn unfavourable again.Global inflation rates have continued to diminish rapidly. This is mainly due to lower commodity prices, weaker labour market conditions and greater global economic slack. Risks to global inflation seem to be broadly balanced in the short to medium term. Beyond that horizon, however, inflation risks depend on how efficiently the authorities withdraw the policy stimulus.In line with global developments, economic activity in the euro area has also contracted sharply since the second half of 2008. The euro area economy has shrunk by about 4% over the past two quarters, the worst decline since the start of Economic and Monetary Union. For the current quarter, there is evidence that the economy has shrunk further, though at a slower pace. The economy is no longer in free fall; we are seeing the first signs of stabilisation. Indicators of consumer confidence and business sentiment have continued to improve somewhat. We are also seeing some encouraging signs of normalisation in financial markets. Looking ahead, the euro area economy is likely to be very weak for the remainder of this year, before gradually recovering in the course of 2010. The Eurosystem staff projections for real GDP growth are broadly in line with the most recent forecasts from the IMF and the European Commission. Both institutions expect the euro area economy to contract by 4% or more in 2009, followed by a gradual recovery in 2010. Quarterly growth rates are expected to return to positive levels by mid-2010. The projected gradual recovery reflects the significant macroeconomic stimulus under way and the measures taken to make the financial system function normally both inside and outside the euro area. Inflation in the euro area has declined rapidly since it reached its highest level, 4%, last summer. In May, euro area HICP inflation was down to 0.0%, according to the preliminary estimate from Eurostat. This is the lowest number registered since the launch of the euro. The rapid decline over this period is primarily due to the marked fall in global commodity prices, and particularly oil prices. If we exclude food and energy, however, HICP inflation over the past year has moderated only marginally. In April, the most recent month for which we have data, HICP inflation excluding food and energy was 1.8%.Inflation rates are likely to enter negative territory during the summer, but we expect them to turn positive by the end of 2009. This can largely be explained by base effects from energy prices. These effects are of no concern to the ECB, which aims to maintain price stability in the medium term. In other words, its monetary policy strategy aims to ensure that short-term volatility in inflation rates does not lead to volatility in long-term inflation expectations.It is important not to confuse the temporarily negative inflation rates we are likely to experience this summer with outright deflation. Let me remind you of the difference: a deflationary process is a persistent, broad-based and self-sustaining fall in the overall price level. It is reinforced by the anticipation that prices will decline further in the future. As a consequence, inflation expectations become disanchored and negative, and firms and households may decide to postpone investments and major purchases.In fact, what we are experiencing at the moment can be described as a period of rapid disinflation. This is linked to transitory movements in relative prices and is in principle a welcome development. Provided that medium-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at levels consistent with price stability, low or negative inflation rates for a short period of time may help to sustain real income and may therefore stimulate spending.But even if we expect inflation rates to turn positive again by the end of this year, the weak economic outlook for the euro area is expected to keep domestic price pressures contained for some time. According to the Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections, HICP inflation in the euro area is likely to be very moderate, but above zero, on average this year. Inflation is expected to pick up, but remain at a moderate level in 2010. Forecasts produced by the European Commission and other international organisations paint a similar picture. The risks to this outlook are viewed as broadly balanced. However, in the longer term, it is important that the current policy stimulus is withdrawn in due course.Let me now turn to the monetary analysis, which is particularly useful for assessing risks to price stability in the medium to long term. The latest money and credit data support the assessment of diminishing inflationary pressures in the medium term. The deceleration of broad money growth observed in 2008 increased towards the turn of the year and continues at a rapid pace. Developments in money and credit aggregates have been volatile over the past few months. This may be explained partly by the sharp reduction in the key ECB interest rates, which may have encouraged shifts in the allocation of funds. If we disregard this volatility, the continued deceleration in the pace of underlying monetary expansion and in credit growth seems to reflect the sharp deterioration in economic activity. As regards financing conditions in the euro area, external financing costs have been declining since October last year, and particularly sharply since the start of this year. Following policy interest rate cuts, bank lending rates have fallen significantly. This indicates that the pass-through mechanism from policy rates to the real economy has continued to function in recent months, even though there is evidence that banks’ margins have widened. With credit spreads across all rating classes decreasing from their record highs and with stock prices rising, the overall cost of financing for euro area non-financial corporations is diminishing. In general, the recent positive signs from financial markets point to a gradual improvement in confidence among investors.I will now turn to the policy measures taken in response to the current crisis. Both monetary and fiscal policy-makers have reacted in a forceful and timely manner, aiming to restore confidence. And indeed, as regards the Eurosystem’s monetary policy and liquidity management measures, it seems that our responses are bearing fruit. Confidence has returned to financial markets, and business surveys are picking up. I expect global and domestic demand to increasingly benefit from the significant economic stimulus and the measures taken so far to bring the financial system back to normal functioning.The ECB has acted in a timely, decisive and appropriate manner since the start of the financial market turmoil. We have cut our key policy rate by 325 basis points since last October, when the escalating financial crisis led to a rapid decline of inflationary pressures. The interest rate on the main refinancing operations now stands at 1.0%, its lowest level since the launch of the euro. This level is appropriate taking into account all information and analyses. Money market rates have fallen even further to record lows, and the loan interest rates charged by banks have declined. Our substantive monetary policy easing is already being felt in the real economy. In addition to lowering the policy interest rate quickly and sharply, we have resorted to highly non-standard liquidity operations in order to provide the financial system with the liquidity that was so urgently needed. Last October, we adopted a ‘fixed-rate full allotment’ procedure in all our open market operations. This gives banks as much central bank liquidity as they want at our key policy interest rate, against an expanded list of eligible collateral. Coupled with the fact that essentially all financially sound euro area credit institutions can participate in the Eurosystem's refinancing operations, these measures have significantly eased the banks’ balance sheet constraints, thereby avoiding a sudden stop in the supply of credit and the emergence of a systemic crisis. At the Governing Council meeting in early May, we decided to extend the maturity range of these liquidity-providing operations from six to 12 months. Furthermore, we decided that the Eurosystem will purchase euro-denominated covered bonds issued in the euro area. Last week we announced the details of this purchase programme. These decisions were taken to enhance credit support to the economy through banks. More specifically, all these measures aim to promote the ongoing decline in money market term rates, to encourage banks to maintain and expand their lending to clients, to improve market liquidity in important segments of the private debt security market, and to ease funding conditions for banks and enterprises. These measures take into account the central role played by the euro area banking system in financing the economy. This contrasts with the financial structure of other economic regions. The above-mentioned measures led to a significant increase in the Eurosystem’s balance sheet: it reached a peak of 19% of GDP in December 2008 from 10% of GDP in mid-2007, up by €850 billion. This increase in the size of the balance sheet corresponds to a higher level of outstanding refinancing operations, and has consequently increased the amount of risk borne by the Eurosystem. Since its peak in December, the size of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet has declined by around €300 billion to 15% of GDP in May 2009. This decline suggests a gradual increase in money market activity, at least for very short maturities. The fact that we have taken on additional risk is no coincidence. Whenever liquidity dries up because market participants are reluctant to lend to each other, the central bank has to step in, but at the same time not put its reputation at risk. To summarise, we have employed a wide range of measures to counter the effect of the financial and economic crisis. The approach we have followed has been tailored to the needs of the euro area, where the banking system plays a more important role in financing than in other major economies. These differences are important for the implementation and transmission of monetary policy, and therefore the Eurosystem’s reactions to the crisis cannot be compared directly with those of other leading central banks.Let me now turn to the fiscal policy reaction to the economic crisis. Fiscal authorities in the euro area have demonstrated their willingness and capacity to act rapidly and in a coordinated manner in exceptional circumstances. It is important to distinguish between measures intended to support the banking sector and fiscal policy measures aimed at stimulating demand. Government support for the banking sector was necessary; it has safeguarded the stability of the financial system. The price of this success, however, is that governments have incurred substantial fiscal costs and credit risks that are ultimately borne by taxpayers. Following the adoption of a concerted European action plan on 12 October 2008, euro area governments announced national measures to support the banking sector. These measures consist of government guarantees for interbank lending, recapitalisation of financial institutions in difficulty, increase the coverage of retail deposit insurance and asset relief schemes. Overall, euro area governments committed about 23% of euro area GDP to financial sector support measures. For the euro area, the various support measures adopted so far are expected to have only a small direct impact on government deficits, whereas the impact on debt is expected to be about 3% of GDP. Finally, contingent liabilities related to the financial rescue measures are expected to be about 8% of GDP, excluding government guarantees on retail deposits. These figures, however, do not reflect the very different developments taking place across euro area countries. Between end-September and end-October 2008, concurrent to the announcement of the broad-based bank rescue packages, an adverse shift in market sentiment towards sovereign borrowers occurred. It became more expensive to insure against the default of euro area countries, and this change of mood was reflected in significantly higher sovereign CDS premia for euro area countries. This would suggest that the bank rescue packages brought about an increase in public sector credit risk. At the same time, long-term government bond yield spreads vis-à-vis Germany have widened substantially for most euro area countries. These spreads mainly reflect perceptions of differing liquidity and credit risk among countries. The fact that developments in government bond yield spreads have mirrored higher sovereign CDS premia suggests that concerns about fiscal sustainability have become an important factor, affecting investors’ perceptions. In particular, government bond yield spreads seem to be higher in those Member States regarded as particularly vulnerable in the current environment. Among the relevant factors are current fiscal imbalances, but also external imbalances, and they could ultimately have repercussions on the general government budget. Past fiscal behaviour may also play a role. Rising long-term government bond yields may only have a gradual impact on government borrowing costs, as changes in interest rates only affect the cost of newly issued debt and debt at variable interest rates. However, they may signal both a reduced willingness on the part of investors to provide long-term funding as well as difficulty in accessing capital market funds. So far, most euro area countries have enjoyed relatively low interest rates on new government debt issuance, despite facing considerably more difficult market conditions. Looking ahead, as the economy recovers and competition for financing increases, governments may face higher bond yields again. In addition to providing financial support to the banking sector, euro area governments reacted forcefully to counter the negative impact of the financial turmoil on the real economy. Besides the operation of automatic stabilisers, which provide a significant cushion to the euro area economy by way of lower tax revenues and higher spending on unemployment benefits, the discretionary use of fiscal policy helped to mitigate the effects of the global economic downturn. However, fiscal stimulus measures need to remain temporary and be combined with measures that ensure fiscal sustainability over the medium run. This will preserve trust in the sustainability of public finances and support both the recovery and long-term economic growth.For 2009 and 2010, the European Commission estimates the overall fiscal impulse to the euro area economy, as measured by the change in the general government deficit, to be about 4.6% of GDP, 60% of which is due to the automatic stabilisers.While the recent coordinated fiscal loosening has been broadly accepted as a legitimate and necessary step in the short run, given the exceptional economic circumstances, it also entails a significant fiscal burden. The latest available economic forecasts (EC Spring 2009 Economic Forecasts) point to dramatic developments in euro area public finances. In addition to a rapidly deteriorating general government deficit, which is expected to be above 6% of euro area GDP in 2010, the euro area debt ratio will increase by about 15 percentage points to above 80% of GDP by 2010. In both 2009 and 2010 13 out of 16 euro area countries are expected to have a budget deficit above the 3% of GDP reference value. These figures are very high, though they compare favourably with other major economic regions that have also provided a substantial fiscal impulse to their economy. The budget deficit in both the United Kingdom and the United States is projected to be about 14% of GDP in 2010, whereas in Japan it is projected to be about 9% of GDP. Against this backdrop, euro area countries must reject calls for additional fiscal loosening. In the current environment, any further fiscal stimulus is likely to be counterproductive as it could hamper the economic recovery in two ways. First of all, even higher fiscal deficits could fuel market concerns about a country’s ability to meet its future debt obligations, thus putting upward pressure on interest rates. Second, increasing budget deficits would also raise concerns about a higher tax burden in the future, thus inducing consumers to save rather than spend any additional income. Let me now turn to two important questions regarding the fiscal authorities’ response to the economic crisis. First, do the measures have the potential to restore confidence? Second, are those measures effective? The financial sector support measures, combined with the Eurosystem’s enhanced credit support measures, were successful in safeguarding the stability of the financial system. Together, these initiatives have the potential to tackle the crisis of confidence at its root also by taking into account the fundamental role of the banking sector in the functioning of the economy. The restructuring of the banking sector is the top policy priority, and progress in this domain is the key to economic recovery. Given the challenges which lie ahead, banks should take appropriate measures to strengthen their capital base and, where necessary, take full advantage of government support and in particular recapitalisation measures.As regards fiscal policy response, let me first say that the merits of discretionary measures are less obvious than those safeguarding the functioning of the financial system. In principle, automatic stabilisers should represent the first line of defence during an economic downturn. However, under exceptional circumstances and if a country has room for manoeuvre, fiscal policy can contribute to macroeconomic stability also through discretionary actions. When assessing the merits of the different measures taken, we should differentiate between measures such as (1) expenditure increases and (2) tax cuts, and (3) measures like guarantees and loan subsidies to specific sectors of the economy. In fact, although support for credit-constrained firms could ease their access to credit and the restructuring of their balance sheets, it may also lead to an inefficient allocation of capital and the propping up of companies that would otherwise fail. Moreover, this type of support would be difficult to reverse and might act as a brake on long-term growth.Turning to the effectiveness of fiscal measures to stimulate demand (i.e. spending increases and tax cuts), it crucially depends on the behaviour of economic agents, and that in turn also affects the size of the fiscal multipliers (i.e. the GDP effect of fiscal stimulus measures). The expectation that higher government spending today may lead to higher taxation in the future would induce both households and firms to save rather spend any additional income, thus reducing the size of the fiscal multiplier. Therefore, the public perception of overall fiscal sustainability plays an important role in the impact of the respective national fiscal stimuli. The effectiveness of fiscal stimulus measures also depends on the extent to which private investors respond positively to tax policy, with their investments likely to be more responsive in the case of ‘temporary’ tax breaks, as they provide an incentive to bring forward future investment plans. At the same time, there is a risk that fiscal stimulus measures may crowd out private investment by putting upward pressure on interest rates. As regards the size of the fiscal multiplier, empirical studies (e.g. Perotti (2002), Blanchard and Perotti (2002), IMF WEO (2008)) show that in the short term (i.e. after one quarter) public spending multipliers are larger than tax multipliers. By contrast, in the long term, revenue measures are associated with higher growth and faster recoveries. These results reflect the theoretical Keynesian prediction that some of the higher disposable income from a tax cut is saved, while government purchases of goods and services directly affect the aggregate demand. However, the evidence on the relative effectiveness of the different measures is mixed. For the euro area, the measures adopted by governments are estimated to have a short-lived impact on real GDP growth, limited to the year in which they are introduced. Besides these factors, the effectiveness of any stimulus package will depend to a large extent on its design and implementation. Fiscal stimulus measures should be ‘timely, temporary and targeted’. ‘Timely’ means that the measures take effect when they are needed; any delays in assessing the cyclical situation, in taking decisions and implementing the measures may fail to prevent a drop in output. ‘Temporary’ implies that the fiscal impulse should only last as long as the recession in question. ‘Targeted’ relates to the expected size of the multiplier effect. In addition to these ‘TTT’ criteria, the measures should be consistent with other policy objectives such as fiscal sustainability, long-term economic growth and the functioning of the market mechanism.The current crisis has increased the role of the government in the economy. Some bank rescue operations have involved outright nationalisations, so governments now have significant exposure to the financial sector. Similarly, the large fiscal stimuli packages adopted by many countries have led to a large increase in the size of the public sector in the economy. At the same time, the turmoil is being interpreted by some as a crisis of the market economy. It has encouraged critics of the market economy to speak out and demand a much larger role in the economy for governments.The financial system clearly needs a fundamental overhaul. Financial institutions have to take a different approach and adopt appropriate incentives. Risk-takers should be liable and not only reap the rewards of their actions but also bear responsibility for their consequences. We need to strengthen the regulation of the financial system, and in particular, we must improve the international cooperation between national supervisors of the financial sector. But let me hasten to add that policy-makers must not get carried away by recent events; they should act in a measured way, and not throw the baby out with the bathwater. While governments have had no alternative but to support systemically relevant financial institutions, they should, as a rule, keep their assistance to specific sectors or firms to a minimum. And when they do intervene, they should prepare clear and credible exit strategies. No matter how serious the current crisis is, the market economy remains the best way to organise our economic affairs. It is only 20 years ago since the breakdown of the socialist system in eastern Europe, which demonstrated the failures of central planning and heavy government involvement. Therefore, once we emerge from the current crisis, the role of government in the economy needs to be scaled back. Its presence in the banking sector must be gradually reduced as the restructuring of the sector starts to take effect. The stimulus measures must be reversed in due course. We have seen in the past how so-called temporary measures ended up being permanent.An exit strategy is a comprehensive programme to withdraw and neutralise measures taken during the financial crisis, without causing any harm to the economy. If they have no well-defined exit strategy, governments may get bogged down and the positive impact of the measures taken may be undermined. A well thought-out exit strategy is needed to reassure economic agents that a timely restoration of the level playing field in the different sectors of the economy is the ultimate objective. As such, an exit strategy needs to contain clear criteria about the timing of the withdrawal of the financial support and the reversal of the fiscal stimuli.In principle, the extra government debt incurred by asset acquisition should be covered by future sales of these assets. The state guarantees should serve to stabilise the banking system and would then not need to be called on. As to the fiscal stimuli, euro area governments did not lay out clear exit strategies when they announced the stimuli. Some of their measures do not expire automatically or are not explicitly designed to be temporary. The possible difficulties of reversing the fiscal stimulus packages may hinder the return to sound fiscal positions in the short run. Under these circumstances, the peer pressure mechanism, on which the EU fiscal framework is based, may be weakened thus making more difficult a return to sound fiscal policies. As a matter of fact, countries with high fiscal deficits may be tempted not to put political pressure on their peers. Protracted excessive deficits may undermine the credibility of the EU fiscal framework, thus casting doubts on fiscal sustainability and jeopardising the Stability and Growth Pact. In this respect, let me say that the current crisis has taught us an important lesson about the importance of preserving the public’s trust in the soundness of public finances. At the current juncture, euro area governments must make credible commitments to return to sound fiscal policies. Doing so in full compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact is the most credible exit strategy. This requires, first, a full reversal of the fiscal stimulus measures taken so far. This is necessary to ensure an efficient allocation of resources by minimising distortions in the incentives of economic agents and by avoiding a permanent increase in the size of the public sector. Second, governments must live up to their commitment to maintain fiscal discipline. This means that credible fiscal consolidation plans have to be implemented as early as possible, including a consolidation effort of at least 1% of GDP per annum where necessary. If euro area countries do not practise fiscal restraint seriously, the debt dynamics will be in danger of spiralling out of control.The current crisis has shown how important it is for countries to consolidate during good economic times and to build a ‘fiscal reservoir’ from which they can draw in periods of ‘drought’. Many euro area countries failed to do so. They suddenly found themselves in this turbulent environment burdened by high fiscal deficits and debt ratios. Their room for fiscal manoeuvre was very limited, as was their capacity to adopt effective counter-cyclical measures when they were most needed. In addition, the developments in government bond yield spreads since last autumn have shown that, in uncertain times, financial markets increasingly discriminate between countries on the basis of their creditworthiness, including fiscal fundamentals. We are seeing the first, timid signs of an economic recovery; investors are regaining their appetite for risk. It is critical that euro area governments boost confidence in the soundness of public finances as an element to support both the recovery and long-term economic growth.As regards monetary policy, it is equally important to draw up a strategy for withdrawing in due course the extraordinary measures that have been implemented or announced. The ECB obviously cannot maintain the current degree of support indefinitely. We are providing substantial short-term support to the financial system and the real economy, and thereby ultimately maintaining price stability. But what if macroeconomic conditions warrant a removal of monetary stimulus?In fact, we are prepared to take appropriate actions once the macroeconomic environment improves. We will ensure that the measures taken can be quickly unwound and the liquidity provided absorbed. This includes, for instance, unwinding the increase in the average maturity of our refinancing operations. Being prepared to exit from our non-standard measures – as soon as the macroeconomic conditions justify such a move – helps to maintain price stability over the medium term and to ensure a firm anchoring of longer-term inflation expectations. Any changes in the operational framework will of course be communicated in good time. The ECB and the Eurosystem remain committed to pursuing a timely and transparent communication policy. Likewise, the financial sector needs to live up to its responsibilities and not to become dependent on long-term funding through the ECB’s refinancing operations. It is important that the financial sector also helps to restore confidence among banks. Japan, since the early 1990s, has exemplified the economic damage that can result from not promptly restructuring an ailing financial system. Some earlier attempts by policy-makers to stimulate the economy during downturns were ineffective and only led to higher inflation. The 1970s come to mind, when the surge in oil prices led to persistently high inflation and lower economic growth. Unsurprisingly, some people have been wondering if the exceptional measures taken by central banks and fiscal authorities during the current crisis will result in another period of high inflation. But the situation today is very different from the 1970s. The Eurosystem’s objective is to maintain price stability in the medium term, and nothing else. All our monetary policy decisions since the financial crisis erupted have been taken in order to safeguard price stability in a symmetric way. Maintaining price stability will remain the only objective that guides our decisions. This implies that the very accommodative monetary policy stance we are pursuing now will be reversed once the economy starts to recover and upside risks to price stability emerge again. The people of the euro area can trust our commitment to deliver price stability because they know we are independent and not subject to outside influence. Let me now turn to the most important lessons I think we can draw from the current crisis with respect to monetary policy. I would like to raise three points. First of all, the current crisis demonstrates, once again, how important it is for central banks to remain independent of political influence. Even if we are experiencing the worst economic downturn since the 1930s, long-term inflation expectations in the euro area remain solidly anchored in line with the ECB’s definition of price stability. This represents the strongest and most reassuring protection against a deflationary spiral, and it is the result of market agents trusting our commitment and ability to deliver price stability. Our independence, our clear mandate and our precise definition of price stability have been crucial factors in maintaining inflation expectations firmly anchored during these challenging times.Secondly, although central banks may be charged with additional tasks in the aftermath of the crisis, their primary objective must remain the maintenance of price stability. We cannot allow any conflicts of interest to arise. The high-level expert group headed by Jacques de Larosière, former Governor of the Bank of France and Managing Director of the IMF, has identified a number of weaknesses in the supervisory framework both inside and outside Europe that contributed to the build-up of the current crisis. One of the group’s proposals is to give the ECB more responsibility for so-called macro-prudential supervision. This means supervision that aims to limit the risk of distress in the financial system as a whole, but does not extend to supervision of individual financial institutions. Building on the de Larosière report, the European Commission has recently proposed to establish a European Systemic Risk Council (ESRC), chaired by the ECB President.The ECB welcomes the Commission’s proposal. Establishing the ESRC will substantially improve the present institutional arrangements for risk assessment at EU level. Much of the work that will be done by the ESRC also be useful for assessing risks to price stability. But I would also like to stress that maintaining price stability must remain the primary objective of the Eurosystem. With only one tool at our disposal – the interest rate – we cannot achieve more than one objective. Therefore, it is particularly important for any risk warnings from the new Council to be translated into policy action by the responsible authorities as effectively as possible. The ECB cannot use its policy interest rate to mitigate risks that are not directly related to price stability. At the same time, price stability is the best contribution we can make to financial stability. My third point concerns the important role played by monetary analysis – and in particular the role of asset prices – when assessing the risks to price stability over the medium term. Price stability is our primary objective, but this does not imply that we only focus on short to medium-term movements in inflation. Any build-up of financial imbalances which could pose risks to price stability in the longer term could be overlooked under a restrictive short-term approach. The ECB’s assessment of risks to price stability is well equipped to detect these types of risk as it is based on a comprehensive economic and monetary analysis – its well-known two-pillar strategy. The first pillar, the economic analysis, is common to most central banks. This analysis basically consists of identifying risks to price stability in the short to medium term by analysing the interplay between aggregate supply and aggregate demand in the economy.The second pillar, the monetary analysis, plays a more prominent role at the ECB than at other central banks. The ECB pays special attention to monetary developments in recognition of the fact that monetary growth and inflation are closely related in the medium to long term. Analysing developments in credit, and in particular loans to the private sector, is helpful in extracting the relevant signals from the monetary developments. This analysis also implies a regular monitoring of asset price developments and their implications. This analysis will become even more prominent in the future. The ECB has been a pioneer when it comes to monetary analysis, and with the benefit of hindsight, we can say that the monetary analysis served us well in recent years. Back in 2005, the monetary analysis was already indicating upward risks to price stability coming from strong growth in money and credit, driven by a rapid increase in asset prices, and house prices in particular. This led us to increase interest rates in a series of steps starting in December 2005, at a time when the economic analysis was providing more mixed signals. The decision to tighten monetary policy at an early stage may be one reason why financial imbalances in the euro area did not develop as far as in some other countries. To conclude, let me summarise my main points. The world economy is in its worst recession since the 1930s, and the euro area economy is no exception. The fiscal and monetary authorities have responded forcefully and their efforts are slowly starting to bear fruit. The pace of the economic contraction appears to be slowing down, and confidence indicators have improved somewhat.The crisis has highlighted the importance of sound public finances. Governments need to consolidate during good economic times in order to have room for manoeuvre during not-so-good times. With respect to monetary policy, the crisis has demonstrated the importance of having an independent central bank credibly committed to price stability. The pre-crisis years also showed the usefulness of the monetary analysis, the second pillar in the Eurosystem’s assessment of risks to price stability. In particular, it helped to maintain a medium-term perspective.Looking ahead, the fiscal and monetary authorities have an important role in sustaining the economic recovery. Governments must devise and enact credible strategies to exit from the banking sector and to ensure that the discretionary policy measures adopted during the crisis will be reversed. Their full compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact is the best tool to solidly anchor market expectations. Furthermore, the ECB’s commitment to maintaining price stability is the best contribution monetary policy can make to sustaining economic recovery and long-term economic growth. The ECB is well prepared to take appropriate action and also to exit from its non-standard monetary policy and liquidity management measures in a credible manner once the macroeconomic environment improves. Most importantly, we will continue to deliver on what we are expected to deliver, which is to maintain price stability, and to provide an anchor of confidence in difficult times.Blanchard, O. and R. Perotti (2002). ""An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output."" Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(4): 1329-1368.International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook (2008). Chapter 5 ""Fiscal Policy as a countercyclical tool."" OctoberPerotti, R. (2002). ""Estimating the effects of fiscal policy in OECD countries."" ECB Working Paper no. 168.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",follow default lehman brother midseptemb last year turmoil financi market start august turn major financi crisi liquid dri credit flow economi slow problem financi system quick spill real economi advers feedback loop real economi financi sector emerg led sever synchronis global econom downturn year euro area spare econom activ declin sharpli inflat lowest level sinc launch euro monetari fiscal author across globe respond quick decis extraordinari develop particular background rapid reced inflationari pressur risk eurosystem taken monetari polici liquid manag measur unpreced natur scope time sinc octob last year reduc interest rate main refinanc oper basi point also provid unlimit liquid support bank system euro area maintain flow credit likewis govern euro area react swift stabilis financi system counteract advers impact financi crisi real economi look ahead monetari fiscal author need remain credibl effect fulfil respect respons lay solid foundat futur econom recoveri longterm econom growth job creation crisi shown import independ central bank firm commit object price stabil time govern must make strong credibl commit path fiscal consolid thus compli stabil growth pact must also resist temptat increas size stimulus measur could erod trust sustain public financ undermin effect measur alreadi adopt present today would like first analys econom outlook discuss detail polici measur taken respons crisi consid implic lesson drawn crisi central bank monetari polici let begin assess global econom situat turmoil financi market trigger systemat underpr risk particular us subprim mortgag market develop fullyfledg financi econom crisi global level world economi continu face sever synchronis downturn recent intern busi confid indic suggest pace declin econom activ slow somewhat forecast expect global economi like recov albeit gradual pace june eurosystem staff macroeconom project euro area publish line overal assess base assumpt global economi outsid euro area contract year grow nonetheless econom prospect remain fraught uncertainti compar month ago overal risk global econom growth becom balanc stronger posit confid effect expect trigger monetari fiscal polici measur could lead sustain recoveri global demand global trade quicker normalis financi market credit condit cours global polici action fail strike appropri balanc econom stimulus longerterm sustain financi market condit could turn unfavour global inflat rate continu diminish rapid main due lower commod price weaker labour market condit greater global econom slack risk global inflat seem broad balanc short medium term beyond horizon howev inflat risk depend effici author withdraw polici stimulus line global develop econom activ euro area also contract sharpli sinc second half euro area economi shrunk past two quarter worst declin sinc start econom monetari union current quarter evid economi shrunk though slower pace economi longer free fall see first sign stabilis indic consum confid busi sentiment continu improv somewhat also see encourag sign normalis financi market look ahead euro area economi like weak remaind year gradual recov cours eurosystem staff project real gdp growth broad line recent forecast imf european commiss institut expect euro area economi contract follow gradual recoveri quarter growth rate expect return posit level mid project gradual recoveri reflect signific macroeconom stimulus way measur taken make financi system function normal insid outsid euro area inflat euro area declin rapid sinc reach highest level last summer may euro area hicp inflat accord preliminari estim eurostat lowest number regist sinc launch euro rapid declin period primarili due mark fall global commod price particular oil price exclud food energi howev hicp inflat past year moder margin april recent month data hicp inflat exclud food energi inflat rate like enter negat territori summer expect turn posit end larg explain base effect energi price effect concern ecb aim maintain price stabil medium term word monetari polici strategi aim ensur shortterm volatil inflat rate lead volatil longterm inflat expect import confus temporarili negat inflat rate like experi summer outright deflat let remind differ deflationari process persist broadbas selfsustain fall overal price level reinforc anticip price declin futur consequ inflat expect becom disanchor negat firm household may decid postpon invest major purchas fact experienc moment describ period rapid disinfl link transitori movement relat price principl welcom develop provid mediumterm inflat expect remain well anchor level consist price stabil low negat inflat rate short period time may help sustain real incom may therefor stimul spend even expect inflat rate turn posit end year weak econom outlook euro area expect keep domest price pressur contain time accord eurosystem staff macroeconom project hicp inflat euro area like moder zero averag year inflat expect pick remain moder level forecast produc european commiss intern organis paint similar pictur risk outlook view broad balanc howev longer term import current polici stimulus withdrawn due cours let turn monetari analysi particular use assess risk price stabil medium long term latest money credit data support assess diminish inflationari pressur medium term deceler broad money growth observ increas toward turn year continu rapid pace develop money credit aggreg volatil past month may explain part sharp reduct key ecb interest rate may encourag shift alloc fund disregard volatil continu deceler pace under monetari expans credit growth seem reflect sharp deterior econom activ regard financ condit euro area extern financ cost declin sinc octob last year particular sharpli sinc start year follow polici interest rate cut bank lend rate fallen signific indic passthrough mechan polici rate real economi continu function recent month even though evid bank margin widen credit spread across rate class decreas record high stock price rise overal cost financ euro area nonfinanci corpor diminish general recent posit sign financi market point gradual improv confid among investor turn polici measur taken respons current crisi monetari fiscal policymak react forc time manner aim restor confid inde regard eurosystem monetari polici liquid manag measur seem respons bear fruit confid return financi market busi survey pick expect global domest demand increas benefit signific econom stimulus measur taken far bring financi system back normal function ecb act time decis appropri manner sinc start financi market turmoil cut key polici rate basi point sinc last octob escal financi crisi led rapid declin inflationari pressur interest rate main refinanc oper stand lowest level sinc launch euro level appropri take account inform analys money market rate fallen even record low loan interest rate charg bank declin substant monetari polici eas alreadi felt real economi addit lower polici interest rate quick sharpli resort high nonstandard liquid oper order provid financi system liquid urgent need last octob adopt fixedr full allot procedur open market oper give bank much central bank liquid want key polici interest rate expand list elig collater coupl fact essenti financi sound euro area credit institut particip eurosystem refinanc oper measur signific eas bank balanc sheet constraint therebi avoid sudden stop suppli credit emerg system crisi govern council meet earli may decid extend matur rang liquidityprovid oper six month furthermor decid eurosystem purchas eurodenomin cover bond issu euro area last week announc detail purchas programm decis taken enhanc credit support economi bank specif measur aim promot ongo declin money market term rate encourag bank maintain expand lend client improv market liquid import segment privat debt secur market eas fund condit bank enterpris measur take account central role play euro area bank system financ economi contrast financi structur econom region abovement measur led signific increas eurosystem balanc sheet reach peak gdp decemb gdp mid billion increas size balanc sheet correspond higher level outstand refinanc oper consequ increas amount risk born eurosystem sinc peak decemb size eurosystem balanc sheet declin around billion gdp may declin suggest gradual increas money market activ least short matur fact taken addit risk coincid whenev liquid dri market particip reluct lend central bank step time put reput risk summaris employ wide rang measur counter effect financi econom crisi approach follow tailor need euro area bank system play import role financ major economi differ import implement transmiss monetari polici therefor eurosystem reaction crisi cannot compar direct lead central bank let turn fiscal polici reaction econom crisi fiscal author euro area demonstr willing capac act rapid coordin manner except circumst import distinguish measur intend support bank sector fiscal polici measur aim stimul demand govern support bank sector necessari safeguard stabil financi system price success howev govern incur substanti fiscal cost credit risk ultim born taxpay follow adopt concert european action plan octob euro area govern announc nation measur support bank sector measur consist govern guarante interbank lend recapitalis financi institut difficulti increas coverag retail deposit insur asset relief scheme overal euro area govern commit euro area gdp financi sector support measur euro area various support measur adopt far expect small direct impact govern deficit wherea impact debt expect gdp final conting liabil relat financi rescu measur expect gdp exclud govern guarante retail deposit figur howev reflect differ develop take place across euro area countri endseptemb endoctob concurr announc broadbas bank rescu packag advers shift market sentiment toward sovereign borrow occur becam expens insur default euro area countri chang mood reflect signific higher sovereign cds premia euro area countri would suggest bank rescu packag brought increas public sector credit risk time longterm govern bond yield spread visàvi germani widen substanti euro area countri spread main reflect percept differ liquid credit risk among countri fact develop govern bond yield spread mirror higher sovereign cds premia suggest concern fiscal sustain becom import factor affect investor percept particular govern bond yield spread seem higher member state regard particular vulner current environ among relev factor current fiscal imbal also extern imbal could ultim repercuss general govern budget past fiscal behaviour may also play role rise longterm govern bond yield may gradual impact govern borrow cost chang interest rate affect cost newli issu debt debt variabl interest rate howev may signal reduc willing part investor provid longterm fund well difficulti access capit market fund far euro area countri enjoy relat low interest rate new govern debt issuanc despit face consider difficult market condit look ahead economi recov competit financ increas govern may face higher bond yield addit provid financi support bank sector euro area govern react forc counter negat impact financi turmoil real economi besid oper automat stabilis provid signific cushion euro area economi way lower tax revenu higher spend unemploy benefit discretionari use fiscal polici help mitig effect global econom downturn howev fiscal stimulus measur need remain temporari combin measur ensur fiscal sustain medium run preserv trust sustain public financ support recoveri longterm econom growth european commiss estim overal fiscal impuls euro area economi measur chang general govern deficit gdp due automat stabilis recent coordin fiscal loosen broad accept legitim necessari step short run given except econom circumst also entail signific fiscal burden latest avail econom forecast ec spring econom forecast point dramat develop euro area public financ addit rapid deterior general govern deficit expect euro area gdp euro area debt ratio increas percentag point gdp euro area countri expect budget deficit gdp refer valu figur high though compar favour major econom region also provid substanti fiscal impuls economi budget deficit unit kingdom unit state project gdp wherea japan project gdp backdrop euro area countri must reject call addit fiscal loosen current environ fiscal stimulus like counterproduct could hamper econom recoveri two way first even higher fiscal deficit could fuel market concern countri abil meet futur debt oblig thus put upward pressur interest rate second increas budget deficit would also rais concern higher tax burden futur thus induc consum save rather spend addit incom let turn two import question regard fiscal author respons econom crisi first measur potenti restor confid second measur effect financi sector support measur combin eurosystem enhanc credit support measur success safeguard stabil financi system togeth initi potenti tackl crisi confid root also take account fundament role bank sector function economi restructur bank sector top polici prioriti progress domain key econom recoveri given challeng lie ahead bank take appropri measur strengthen capit base necessari take full advantag govern support particular recapitalis measur regard fiscal polici respons let first say merit discretionari measur less obvious safeguard function financi system principl automat stabilis repres first line defenc econom downturn howev except circumst countri room manoeuvr fiscal polici contribut macroeconom stabil also discretionari action assess merit differ measur taken differenti measur expenditur increas tax cut measur like guarante loan subsidi specif sector economi fact although support creditconstrain firm could eas access credit restructur balanc sheet may also lead ineffici alloc capit prop compani would otherwis fail moreov type support would difficult revers might act brake longterm growth turn effect fiscal measur stimul demand e spend increas tax cut crucial depend behaviour econom agent turn also affect size fiscal multipli e gdp effect fiscal stimulus measur expect higher govern spend today may lead higher taxat futur would induc household firm save rather spend addit incom thus reduc size fiscal multipli therefor public percept overal fiscal sustain play import role impact respect nation fiscal stimuli effect fiscal stimulus measur also depend extent privat investor respond posit tax polici invest like respons case temporari tax break provid incent bring forward futur invest plan time risk fiscal stimulus measur may crowd privat invest put upward pressur interest rate regard size fiscal multipli empir studi e g perotti blanchard perotti imf weo show short term e one quarter public spend multipli larger tax multipli contrast long term revenu measur associ higher growth faster recoveri result reflect theoret keynesian predict higher dispos incom tax cut save govern purchas good servic direct affect aggreg demand howev evid relat effect differ measur mix euro area measur adopt govern estim shortliv impact real gdp growth limit year introduc besid factor effect stimulus packag depend larg extent design implement fiscal stimulus measur time temporari target time mean measur take effect need delay assess cyclic situat take decis implement measur may fail prevent drop output temporari impli fiscal impuls last long recess question target relat expect size multipli effect addit ttt criteria measur consist polici object fiscal sustain longterm econom growth function market mechan current crisi increas role govern economi bank rescu oper involv outright nationalis govern signific exposur financi sector similar larg fiscal stimuli packag adopt mani countri led larg increas size public sector economi time turmoil interpret crisi market economi encourag critic market economi speak demand much larger role economi govern financi system clear need fundament overhaul financi institut take differ approach adopt appropri incent risktak liabl reap reward action also bear respons consequ need strengthen regul financi system particular must improv intern cooper nation supervisor financi sector let hasten add policymak must get carri away recent event act measur way throw babi bathwat govern altern support system relev financi institut rule keep assist specif sector firm minimum interven prepar clear credibl exit strategi matter serious current crisi market economi remain best way organis econom affair year ago sinc breakdown socialist system eastern europ demonstr failur central plan heavi govern involv therefor emerg current crisi role govern economi need scale back presenc bank sector must gradual reduc restructur sector start take effect stimulus measur must revers due cours seen past socal temporari measur end perman exit strategi comprehens programm withdraw neutralis measur taken financi crisi without caus harm economi welldefin exit strategi govern may get bog posit impact measur taken may undermin well thoughtout exit strategi need reassur econom agent time restor level play field differ sector economi ultim object exit strategi need contain clear criteria time withdraw financi support revers fiscal stimuli principl extra govern debt incur asset acquisit cover futur sale asset state guarante serv stabilis bank system would need call fiscal stimuli euro area govern lay clear exit strategi announc stimuli measur expir automat explicit design temporari possibl difficulti revers fiscal stimulus packag may hinder return sound fiscal posit short run circumst peer pressur mechan eu fiscal framework base may weaken thus make difficult return sound fiscal polici matter fact countri high fiscal deficit may tempt put polit pressur peer protract excess deficit may undermin credibl eu fiscal framework thus cast doubt fiscal sustain jeopardis stabil growth pact respect let say current crisi taught us import lesson import preserv public trust sound public financ current junctur euro area govern must make credibl commit return sound fiscal polici full complianc stabil growth pact credibl exit strategi requir first full revers fiscal stimulus measur taken far necessari ensur effici alloc resourc minimis distort incent econom agent avoid perman increas size public sector second govern must live commit maintain fiscal disciplin mean credibl fiscal consolid plan implement earli possibl includ consolid effort least gdp per annum necessari euro area countri practis fiscal restraint serious debt dynam danger spiral control current crisi shown import countri consolid good econom time build fiscal reservoir draw period drought mani euro area countri fail sudden found turbul environ burden high fiscal deficit debt ratio room fiscal manoeuvr limit capac adopt effect countercycl measur need addit develop govern bond yield spread sinc last autumn shown uncertain time financi market increas discrimin countri basi creditworthi includ fiscal fundament see first timid sign econom recoveri investor regain appetit risk critic euro area govern boost confid sound public financ element support recoveri longterm econom growth regard monetari polici equal import draw strategi withdraw due cours extraordinari measur implement announc ecb obvious cannot maintain current degre support indefinit provid substanti shortterm support financi system real economi therebi ultim maintain price stabil macroeconom condit warrant remov monetari stimulus fact prepar take appropri action macroeconom environ improv ensur measur taken quick unwound liquid provid absorb includ instanc unwind increas averag matur refinanc oper prepar exit nonstandard measur soon macroeconom condit justifi move help maintain price stabil medium term ensur firm anchor longerterm inflat expect chang oper framework cours communic good time ecb eurosystem remain commit pursu time transpar communic polici likewis financi sector need live respons becom depend longterm fund ecb refinanc oper import financi sector also help restor confid among bank japan sinc earli exemplifi econom damag result prompt restructur ail financi system earlier attempt policymak stimul economi downturn ineffect led higher inflat come mind surg oil price led persist high inflat lower econom growth unsurpris peopl wonder except measur taken central bank fiscal author current crisi result anoth period high inflat situat today differ eurosystem object maintain price stabil medium term noth els monetari polici decis sinc financi crisi erupt taken order safeguard price stabil symmetr way maintain price stabil remain object guid decis impli accommod monetari polici stanc pursu revers economi start recov upsid risk price stabil emerg peopl euro area trust commit deliv price stabil know independ subject outsid influenc let turn import lesson think draw current crisi respect monetari polici would like rais three point first current crisi demonstr import central bank remain independ polit influenc even experienc worst econom downturn sinc longterm inflat expect euro area remain solid anchor line ecb definit price stabil repres strongest reassur protect deflationari spiral result market agent trust commit abil deliv price stabil independ clear mandat precis definit price stabil crucial factor maintain inflat expect firm anchor challeng time second although central bank may charg addit task aftermath crisi primari object must remain mainten price stabil cannot allow conflict interest aris highlevel expert group head jacqu de larosièr former governor bank franc manag director imf identifi number weak supervisori framework insid outsid europ contribut buildup current crisi one group propos give ecb respons socal macroprudenti supervis mean supervis aim limit risk distress financi system whole extend supervis individu financi institut build de larosièr report european commiss recent propos establish european system risk council esrc chair ecb presid ecb welcom commiss propos establish esrc substanti improv present institut arrang risk assess eu level much work done esrc also use assess risk price stabil would also like stress maintain price stabil must remain primari object eurosystem one tool dispos interest rate cannot achiev one object therefor particular import risk warn new council translat polici action respons author effect possibl ecb cannot use polici interest rate mitig risk direct relat price stabil time price stabil best contribut make financi stabil third point concern import role play monetari analysi particular role asset price assess risk price stabil medium term price stabil primari object impli focus short mediumterm movement inflat buildup financi imbal could pose risk price stabil longer term could overlook restrict shortterm approach ecb assess risk price stabil well equip detect type risk base comprehens econom monetari analysi wellknown twopillar strategi first pillar econom analysi common central bank analysi basic consist identifi risk price stabil short medium term analys interplay aggreg suppli aggreg demand economi second pillar monetari analysi play promin role ecb central bank ecb pay special attent monetari develop recognit fact monetari growth inflat close relat medium long term analys develop credit particular loan privat sector help extract relev signal monetari develop analysi also impli regular monitor asset price develop implic analysi becom even promin futur ecb pioneer come monetari analysi benefit hindsight say monetari analysi serv us well recent year back monetari analysi alreadi indic upward risk price stabil come strong growth money credit driven rapid increas asset price hous price particular led us increas interest rate seri step start decemb time econom analysi provid mix signal decis tighten monetari polici earli stage may one reason financi imbal euro area develop far countri conclud let summaris main point world economi worst recess sinc euro area economi except fiscal monetari author respond forc effort slowli start bear fruit pace econom contract appear slow confid indic improv somewhat crisi highlight import sound public financ govern need consolid good econom time order room manoeuvr notsogood time respect monetari polici crisi demonstr import independ central bank credibl commit price stabil precrisi year also show use monetari analysi second pillar eurosystem assess risk price stabil particular help maintain mediumterm perspect look ahead fiscal monetari author import role sustain econom recoveri govern must devis enact credibl strategi exit bank sector ensur discretionari polici measur adopt crisi revers full complianc stabil growth pact best tool solid anchor market expect furthermor ecb commit maintain price stabil best contribut monetari polici make sustain econom recoveri longterm econom growth ecb well prepar take appropri action also exit nonstandard monetari polici liquid manag measur credibl manner macroeconom environ improv import continu deliv expect deliv maintain price stabil provid anchor confid difficult time blanchard o r perotti empir character dynam effect chang govern spend tax output quarter journal econom intern monetari fund world econom outlook chapter fiscal polici countercycl tool octoberperotti r estim effect fiscal polici oecd countri ecb work paper reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en