Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The Quest for the Holy Grail? – European Financial Integration: Achievements and Hurdles,16-03-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,3810,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen [1],It is a great pleasure for me to speak here at the Parsifal Workshop on securing the future critical financial information and technologies infrastructure. Parsifal, the acronym of your project, brings to mind the eponymous hero of a major medieval German epic poem. His quest for the Holy Grail has captivated generations of readers across Europe. Likewise, the quest for European financial integration has engaged policy makers, market participants and academia. We may not be the Knights of the Round Table of King Arthur’s court at Camelot, but we may use their determination and wisdom in their quest as an example in our work towards more integrated financial systems. Today I would like to focus my remarks on market infrastructures and their importance for achieving a truly integrated European financial market. I will first explain the economic rationale behind the ECB’s interest in financial integration. I will then explain through concrete examples how a well integrated market infrastructure for payment and securites settlement represents a conditio sine qua non for financial integration. Together with the achievements I will also highlight the areas which need further progress.Analogously to the Holy Grail, which was believed to have magical properties, one could argue that financial integration brings many, almost magical, economic benefits. But let me explain briefly, why the economic benefits of financial integration are far from magic, but real. The financial system plays an essential role in the functioning of modern economies: by efficiently allocating resources across space and time, it is instrumental to ensure long-term non-inflationary growth. Furthermore, from a central banking perspective, the financial system represents the primary channel through which monetary policy affects the economy. A stable and efficient financial system enhances the smooth and effective transmission of monetary policy throughout the economy. It also affects consumption, savings and investment decisions, which are a crucial ingredient for the conduct of monetary policy.The issue of financial integration is of particular importance for the ECB, as financial integration not only contributes to the smooth and effective transmission of the single monetary policy throughout the euro area, but also to the smooth operation of the underlying payment systems. Financial integration also increases the depth and liquidity of financial markets, and consequently enhances the resilience of the European financial system. It also offers greater scope for geographical risk diversification, promoting consumption and income risk sharing.Integrated financial markets also help to realise the full economic potential of the European Union, as recalled in the Lisbon strategy. Financial integration contributes to the development of the financial system by increasing competition and expanding markets, which results in lower intermediation costs and a more efficient allocation of capital. These effects, in turn, raise the potential for long-term non-inflationary economic growth. For all these reasons the ECB is closely monitoring the degree of integration and development of euro area financial markets. Since 2005, we have been publishing indicators of financial integration in the euro area, together with a report providing an overall assessment of the degree of financial integration in the main financial market segments, ranging from retail loans to wholesale equity trading. Besides monitoring and raising awareness about the state of European financial integration, the ECB contributes to the enhancement of financial integration by providing central banking services (as in the case of payment systems), giving advice on the legislative and regulatory framework, and acting as a catalyst for private sector activities.According to our definition of financial integration – which underpins our quantitative analysis – financial markets are considered integrated if all agents face the same set of rules, are treated equally and have equal access to financial products. If these conditions are satisfied, any price difference between two identical assets should be immediately arbitraged away by rational agents. Reflecting the most recent advances in research, we have developed a number of quantitative indicators based both on quantities and prices.Until the start of the financial crisis, the degree of financial integration has been continuously increasing, although at different speed, across the various market segments. The money market – where banks lend to each other on a very short term – appeared to be the most integrated. Also, government and corporate bond markets have been quite integrated, too. In contrast, equity and retail banking markets are the least integrated.Three conclusions stand out in this regard. First, integration is typically more advanced in those markets that are closer to the single monetary policy. Second, wholesale markets tend to be more integrated than retail markets. Third, market integration is correlated with the degree of integration of the related underlying market infrastructures such as payments and securities settlement systems. Any quest has its challenges and the greater the challenge the greater the fascination of the quest. The Holy Grail was believed to be kept in a mysterious castle surrounded by a wasteland and hardly accessible. The questing knights had to go through all sort of mental and physical tests. Lack of integration reflects more prosaically the existence of barriers to cross-border activities. While the physical efforts necessary for our quest are certainly less demanding, overcoming these barriers still requires considerable mental energy and intellectual power.We can classify the obstacles to financial integration in three main categories:psychological / informational,regulatory, andtechnical.Recent research shows that there are psychological and cultural barriers to financial integration we cannot neglect. For instance, economists have found empirical evidence that cultural differences between two countries lead to less trade between those countries, less portfolio investment and less direct investment. Besides cultural and psychological reasons, information frictions seem to have a negative effect on financial integration. This type of obstacles can be removed only in the long run through appropriate education and the emerging of a common European culture. The second barrier to financial integration is of a regulatory and legal nature. Although the introduction of the euro has arguably been the single most important force behind the evolution of European financial markets over the past two decades, it has been preceded and followed by a series of key policy initiatives aimed at creating a level playing field across the euro area. The importance of these initiatives in the process of financial integration should not be understated: they are continuously shaping the legislative architecture and technical infrastructure on which financial markets operate. According to our definition of financial integration, a necessary condition for financial integration is the removal of any legislative or regulatory differences which discriminate agents on the basis of their location. Many of the efforts at the European level – in particular the Financial Services Action Plan and the subsequent White Paper on EU financial services policy for the years 2005-2010 – have been directed at the removal of barriers to cross-border activities. EU policy-makers have devoted considerable efforts to removing the remaining regulatory and technical obstacles. As to the third - the technical - barrier to financial integration, a cornerstone of an integrated financial market is the availability of suitable market infrastructures for transferring funds and securities within and between countries. After all, the availability of reliable and safe payment and securities settlement mechanisms for the transfer of funds and securities is a conditio sine qua non for the majority of economic interactions – no payment, no trade. Due to the very rapid growth in the volume and the value of payment transactions stemming from the money, foreign exchange and securities markets, the importance of payment and securities clearing and settlement infrastructures has grown considerably over the last two decades. Ultimately, an integrated infrastructure will allow market players such as banks and service providers and the final customers to realise cost savings by fostering economies of scale. They will also allow them to benefit from increased speed and easier handling of transactions due to the harmonisation and streamlining of procedures. Furthermore, increased competition will spur innovation, better services and lower prices. This will lead to greater efficiency and safety of the capital markets and, ultimately, as I have argued before, to higher levels of non-inflationary economic growth. European policy makers and the Eurosystem in particular have devoted great efforts to the establishment of a common payment and securities settlement infrastructure. In the following, I will identify and discuss three areas in which the Eurosystem has taken an active role in the integration of payment and securities settlement infrastructure in Europe:First, I will talk about the infrastructure for large-value payments. Large-value payments are mainly interbank payments. They are usually time critical, and due to their high value, their orderly settlement is essential for the proper functioning of financial markets. Since the introduction of the euro, a high level of integration in the European large-value payment clearing and settlement infrastructure has been achieved thanks to the establishment of the large-value payment system of the Eurosystem, TARGET/TARGET2.Second, I will examine the European retail payment market. Retail payments are payments between non-financial institutions, e.g. private households, non-financial corporations or government agencies. The integration of the European retail payments market has yet to be achieved. For example, some payment instruments – such as the direct debit – available at national level are not yet available in a cross-border context. The creation of a Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) will enable customers to make cashless payments throughout the euro area with a single set of payment instruments from a single bank account, regardless of their location. The Eurosystem considers the SEPA as an extremely important project for European financial integration and is fostering this process by acting as a catalyst. Third, I will look at the integration of the securities market infrastructure in Europe. More particularly, I will address the post-trading infrastructure, i.e. the infrastructure for the actual transfer of funds and securities within and across countries. Like the retail payment market, the European securities settlement infrastructure has remained highly fragmented despite the establishment of the single currency. To overcome the fragmentation, the Eurosystem in its operator role has launched the TARGET2 Securities project. For each of these three areas, I will elaborate on the achievements made or expected to be made in relation to European financial integration, but also point out the threats and potential hurdles.Before the introduction of the euro in January 1999, only domestic large-value payment systems existed. These were operated by central banks or commercial banks. Central banks have been offering real-time gross-settlement (RTGS) systems to the commercial banks for large-value interbank transfers because these systems are required for the settlement of monetary policy operations.Given that the first RTGS systems were created with the aim of meeting domestic requirements, they were rather diverse in nature and not necessarily suited to the needs of a single currency area. The prevalent way for making cross-border payments within the EU was via correspondent banking, at higher costs and delays compared to national transactions.To enable the conduct of a single monetary policy, any difference between payments within and across countries in the euro-area had to be eliminated. Thus, the Eurosystem set up TARGET as a decentralised system, interlinking the existing national RTGS systems of the EU Member States into a single system. In TARGET2, which went live in May 2008, the decentralised structure of the TARGET system was replaced by a single technical platform. As a result, we have come within reach of the grail by having an integrated and highly efficient large-value payments landscape in Europe today. Indeed, TARGET2 is the first market infrastructure to be completely integrated and harmonised at the European level. There is unanimous agreement that the integration of the large value payment systems has been instrumental to the integration of money markets and wholesale banking activities in Europe. TARGET2 processes a daily average of nearly 400,000 transactions, for a daily average value of 2.6 trillion euro.Along with its success in integrating and harmonising large-value payments at the European level, TARGET2 faces two challenges. First, payment and securities settlement infrastructures in general have become more vulnerable because of their ever-increasing reliance on fast evolving electronic data-processing and telecommunications technology. Here, the present workshop and the Parsifal project in general are expected to contribute to the protection of financial infrastructures by ensuring trust, security and reliability of information and telecommunications technology. Second, payment and securities settlement infrastructures are increasingly interconnected through a wide array of complex relationships. As a result, the smooth functioning of an individual infrastructure often depends on the smooth functioning of other related infrastructures. To address this issue, the main central banks of the world published a report on the interdependencies of payment and settlement systems in summer last year and provided a series of suggestions to system operators, financial institutions, and service providers, but also to central banks and other authorities, on how to increase the resilience of global payment and settlement infrastructure.Let me elaborate now on the harmonisation and consolidation of the European retail payment market which – unlike the large-value payments – is still in its early stages. Despite the introduction of the common currency, payment habits – such as the use of cash versus cashless payment instruments – still vary widely across the euro area. In some countries, cash payments still make up more than 90% of retail transactions by households, in others, the advantages of cashless payments have driven down cash usage considerably. In some countries, cheques are still widely used, while in others, they have been phased out altogether. Likewise, retail clearing and settlement is organised differently in the various countries, reflecting local tradition and business preferences.As market forces alone were not enough to remove these entrenched national differences, the banking industry joined forces in their quest for market integration and launched the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) initiative in 2002. The primary objective of this initiative is to achieve a fully integrated market for retail payment services in the euro area with no distinction between national and cross-border payments. More easily said, the aim is to have one set of pan-European payment instruments (credit transfer, direct debit and cards) which replace the current national ones. The Eurosystem strongly supports the SEPA by closely monitoring the developments and providing guidance to the market. For instance, the Eurosystem publishes regularly a progress report on the SEPA, assessing what has been achieved, analysing obstacles and threats and issuing messages to the relevant stakeholders.Let me focus on the first two instruments, the credit transfer and the direct debit. With the introduction of the SEPA Credit Transfer (SCT) on 28 January 2008, the first pan-European retail payment instrument has become available. Almost all banks active in the payment business in Europe (i.e. about 4,500 banks) adhere to the SCT scheme, i.e. they are able to offer and process the SCT. Likewise, most retail payment infrastructures that were processing credit transfers in euro have become SCT scheme-compliant, i.e. they offer clearing and settlement of the SCT. Preparations for the second European payment instrument, the SEPA Direct Debit (SDD), are ongoing. While the design of both the core service and the business-to-business service are finalised, solutions are required for practical implementation issues such as the ongoing legal validity of existing direct debit mandates, reachability of direct debit payees and in particular the multilateral interchange fee (MIF), i.e. a transaction fee payable from the payer bank to the payee bank. The need for such transaction fee is challenged by DG-COMP of the European Commission. The banking sector, the European Commission and the European Central Bank have been working towards a solution for some time, and the issue needs be resolved urgently so as not to endanger the launch of the SDD on 1 November 2009. Despite the fact that the SEPA project has been ongoing for about seven years and that a lot of product design and standardisation work has been undertaken and completed successfully, the practical implementation and adoption of the SEPA, which is the ultimate litmus test of the success of the integration of retail payments in the euro area, is slow. For instance, after being in existence for over a year, only about 1.9 % of total credit transfer volume in the euro area are SCT transactions. [2] Banks see the responsibility on the side of corporations and public administrations to bring the critical mass of payments to the SEPA environment. In this context, I am very pleased to report that the ECB has migrated all its payments for salaries, bills etc. to SEPA payments right from the start of the SEPA in January 2008. Corporations and public administrations claim that they can see the benefits of the SEPA, but still take a cautious approach towards the actual implementation. One of the major difficulties cited relates to obtaining IBAN and BIC information. I expect that the provision of good quality services for deriving IBAN from national account numbers and reliable directory services will help to overcome this obstacle.To break this circle of wait and see, a general understanding among most SEPA stakeholders has been established that it is important to have a plan by when the European payment instruments (i.e. the SCT and the SDD) will replace the national payment instruments. We need a migration end date from which on onwards only the European payment instruments will exist. We all know that it is inefficient and costly if two schemes continue to run in parallel for a prolonged period of time. Dual processing does not generate the economies of scale that the SEPA is able to deliver and hampers stakeholders in fully reaping its benefits. Maintaining national instruments implies that fragmentation along national borders is preserved, and that the integration of the European retail market has failed. Thus, working towards the establishment of a migration end date is deemed of the utmost importance to make the SEPA a success. The last area I want to bring to your attention is the state of play in the securities settlement infrastructure. Like the retail payment market, the European securities settlement infrastructure has remained highly fragmented despite the establishment of the single currency. Owing to, among other things, the large number of settlement systems, EU cross-border settlement costs are still much higher than domestic ones. At the same time, demand for an integrated European settlement infrastructure has been increasing. The TARGET2 Securities project aims at paving the way towards the grail by overcoming the current fragmentation of the securities settlement infrastructure. It is a technical platform for the central securities depositories (CSDs), which will maintain legal relations with their customers, including custody and notary functions.TARGET2 Securities will provide a single harmonised venue where all EU assets can be exchanged for euro with standardised communications protocols. Furthermore, it will eliminate the financial exposure in cross-CSD settlement through central bank money settlement. It will thus increase the efficiency of collateral management and provide position takers with the ability to optimise their financing across all EU assets in euro. TARGET2 Securities will constitute a major step forward in the delivery of a single integrated securities infrastructure in Europe. The TARGET2 Securities project is currently in the phase of defining the General Functional Specifications, which will be ready by the end of 2009. It will be followed by the development phase and subsequently the testing and migration phase. The envisaged go-live of the system is 2013.In parallel to the TARGET2 Securities project, the Eurosystem launched the CCBM2 project (Correspondent Central Banking Model). CCBM2 will be a common platform for managing Eurosystem collateral, i.e. the assets pledged to the Eurosystem as security for its central bank credit operations, both on a national and pan-European basis. CCBM2 will be fully compatible with TARGET2 and TARGET2 Securities. This creates synergies in the settlement of collateral for Eurosystem credit operations and the release of the related credit to the financial institutions.European financial markets have come a long way in the integration process. The progress achieved so far, however, leaves no room for complacency, as the recent disruptions caused by the financial crisis clearly warn us. The forthcoming ECB report on financial integration – which has a special focus on the effects of the 2007-2008 financial turmoil on the state of financial integration in the euro area – provides clear evidence that the financial turmoil has considerably affected the latest observations of the integration indicators. The usual indicators of financial integration – such as the cross-country standard deviations of money market rates, or government bond spreads – deteriorated gradually over the past year, with a dramatic acceleration in the last months of 2008. When comparing the available indicators for cross-country data with those built on national data, we see that interbank rates shows signs of divergence for all transactions, but more pronounced for cross-border ones. This suggests the presence of heightened credit and liquidity risks everywhere, but possibly larger for cross-border counterparties. Given the impact of the current financial turmoil on the functioning of the financial market, it is of utmost importance to act in a concerted and co-ordinated manner to restore the proper functioning of the financial system. The competent authorities need to be vigilant that instability does not stop or even reverse the financial integration process. The Eurosystem is following market developments very closely and it has been particularly proactive in money markets. It played an essential re-intermediation role, which was instrumental to support the functioning and integration of the money markets during the crisis period. Payment and settlement systems have shown a remarkable resilience to the shocks that have hit the financial world over the past two years. They have played a role of safe haven, as market participants could rely on their smooth functioning and operation. The financial turmoil should reinforce our conviction that a well functioning, stable and integrated payment and securities settlement infrastructure represents a cornerstone of the whole European financial integration process. The current crisis should not be taken as an excuse to slow down the ongoing work on the market infrastructure, on SEPA, TARGET2 Securities, CCBM2. In order to exploit its full potential, banks and central banks need to implement harmonised systems, schemes and procedures. Such an integrated and harmonised system would lead to larger economies of scale, greater innovation and better services. Therefore, it is precisely because of the financial turmoil that we need to strengthen our efforts towards providing more integrated, efficient, safe and reliable market infrastructures as backbones of our financial system.The fascination of the Holy Grail may be due to its very elusiveness. In contrast to that, and despite the recent setback, bringing the European financial integration process to completion remains an attainable goal. Like the Knights of the Round Table, we – market participants and policy-makers – need to stand up in front of these difficulties and respond to the financial crisis by supporting trust in the financial infrastructures and use their potential for further integrating the financial market.[1] I am very grateful to Monika Hempel and Simone Manganelli for their valuable input to this speech.[2] Figure of January 2009.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur speak parsif workshop secur futur critic financi inform technolog infrastructur parsif acronym project bring mind eponym hero major mediev german epic poem quest holi grail captiv generat reader across europ likewis quest european financi integr engag polici maker market particip academia may knight round tabl king arthur court camelot may use determin wisdom quest exampl work toward integr financi system today would like focus remark market infrastructur import achiev truli integr european financi market first explain econom rational behind ecb interest financi integr explain concret exampl well integr market infrastructur payment securit settlement repres conditio sine qua non financi integr togeth achiev also highlight area need progress analog holi grail believ magic properti one could argu financi integr bring mani almost magic econom benefit let explain briefli econom benefit financi integr far magic real financi system play essenti role function modern economi effici alloc resourc across space time instrument ensur longterm noninflationari growth furthermor central bank perspect financi system repres primari channel monetari polici affect economi stabl effici financi system enhanc smooth effect transmiss monetari polici throughout economi also affect consumpt save invest decis crucial ingredi conduct monetari polici issu financi integr particular import ecb financi integr contribut smooth effect transmiss singl monetari polici throughout euro area also smooth oper under payment system financi integr also increas depth liquid financi market consequ enhanc resili european financi system also offer greater scope geograph risk diversif promot consumpt incom risk share integr financi market also help realis full econom potenti european union recal lisbon strategi financi integr contribut develop financi system increas competit expand market result lower intermedi cost effici alloc capit effect turn rais potenti longterm noninflationari econom growth reason ecb close monitor degre integr develop euro area financi market sinc publish indic financi integr euro area togeth report provid overal assess degre financi integr main financi market segment rang retail loan wholesal equiti trade besid monitor rais awar state european financi integr ecb contribut enhanc financi integr provid central bank servic case payment system give advic legisl regulatori framework act catalyst privat sector activ accord definit financi integr underpin quantit analysi financi market consid integr agent face set rule treat equal equal access financi product condit satisfi price differ two ident asset immedi arbitrag away ration agent reflect recent advanc research develop number quantit indic base quantiti price start financi crisi degre financi integr continu increas although differ speed across various market segment money market bank lend short term appear integr also govern corpor bond market quit integr contrast equiti retail bank market least integr three conclus stand regard first integr typic advanc market closer singl monetari polici second wholesal market tend integr retail market third market integr correl degre integr relat under market infrastructur payment secur settlement system quest challeng greater challeng greater fascin quest holi grail believ kept mysteri castl surround wasteland hard access quest knight go sort mental physic test lack integr reflect prosaic exist barrier crossbord activ physic effort necessari quest certain less demand overcom barrier still requir consider mental energi intellectu power classifi obstacl financi integr three main categori psycholog inform regulatori andtechn recent research show psycholog cultur barrier financi integr cannot neglect instanc economist found empir evid cultur differ two countri lead less trade countri less portfolio invest less direct invest besid cultur psycholog reason inform friction seem negat effect financi integr type obstacl remov long run appropri educ emerg common european cultur second barrier financi integr regulatori legal natur although introduct euro arguabl singl import forc behind evolut european financi market past two decad preced follow seri key polici initi aim creat level play field across euro area import initi process financi integr underst continu shape legisl architectur technic infrastructur financi market oper accord definit financi integr necessari condit financi integr remov legisl regulatori differ discrimin agent basi locat mani effort european level particular financi servic action plan subsequ white paper eu financi servic polici year direct remov barrier crossbord activ eu policymak devot consider effort remov remain regulatori technic obstacl third technic barrier financi integr cornerston integr financi market avail suitabl market infrastructur transfer fund secur within countri avail reliabl safe payment secur settlement mechan transfer fund secur conditio sine qua non major econom interact payment trade due rapid growth volum valu payment transact stem money foreign exchang secur market import payment secur clear settlement infrastructur grown consider last two decad ultim integr infrastructur allow market player bank servic provid final custom realis cost save foster economi scale also allow benefit increas speed easier handl transact due harmonis streamlin procedur furthermor increas competit spur innov better servic lower price lead greater effici safeti capit market ultim argu higher level noninflationari econom growth european polici maker eurosystem particular devot great effort establish common payment secur settlement infrastructur follow identifi discuss three area eurosystem taken activ role integr payment secur settlement infrastructur europ first talk infrastructur largevalu payment largevalu payment main interbank payment usual time critic due high valu order settlement essenti proper function financi market sinc introduct euro high level integr european largevalu payment clear settlement infrastructur achiev thank establish largevalu payment system eurosystem targettarget second examin european retail payment market retail payment payment nonfinanci institut e g privat household nonfinanci corpor govern agenc integr european retail payment market yet achiev exampl payment instrument direct debit avail nation level yet avail crossbord context creation singl euro payment area sepa enabl custom make cashless payment throughout euro area singl set payment instrument singl bank account regardless locat eurosystem consid sepa extrem import project european financi integr foster process act catalyst third look integr secur market infrastructur europ particular address posttrad infrastructur e infrastructur actual transfer fund secur within across countri like retail payment market european secur settlement infrastructur remain high fragment despit establish singl currenc overcom fragment eurosystem oper role launch target secur project three area elabor achiev made expect made relat european financi integr also point threat potenti hurdl introduct euro januari domest largevalu payment system exist oper central bank commerci bank central bank offer realtim grosssettl rtgs system commerci bank largevalu interbank transfer system requir settlement monetari polici oper given first rtgs system creat aim meet domest requir rather divers natur necessarili suit need singl currenc area preval way make crossbord payment within eu via correspond bank higher cost delay compar nation transact enabl conduct singl monetari polici differ payment within across countri euroarea elimin thus eurosystem set target decentralis system interlink exist nation rtgs system eu member state singl system target went live may decentralis structur target system replac singl technic platform result come within reach grail integr high effici largevalu payment landscap europ today inde target first market infrastructur complet integr harmonis european level unanim agreement integr larg valu payment system instrument integr money market wholesal bank activ europ target process daili averag near transact daili averag valu trillion euro along success integr harmonis largevalu payment european level target face two challeng first payment secur settlement infrastructur general becom vulner everincreas relianc fast evolv electron dataprocess telecommun technolog present workshop parsif project general expect contribut protect financi infrastructur ensur trust secur reliabl inform telecommun technolog second payment secur settlement infrastructur increas interconnect wide array complex relationship result smooth function individu infrastructur often depend smooth function relat infrastructur address issu main central bank world publish report interdepend payment settlement system summer last year provid seri suggest system oper financi institut servic provid also central bank author increas resili global payment settlement infrastructur let elabor harmonis consolid european retail payment market unlik largevalu payment still earli stage despit introduct common currenc payment habit use cash versus cashless payment instrument still vari wide across euro area countri cash payment still make retail transact household other advantag cashless payment driven cash usag consider countri chequ still wide use other phase altogeth likewis retail clear settlement organis differ various countri reflect local tradit busi prefer market forc alon enough remov entrench nation differ bank industri join forc quest market integr launch singl euro payment area sepa initi primari object initi achiev fulli integr market retail payment servic euro area distinct nation crossbord payment easili said aim one set paneuropean payment instrument credit transfer direct debit card replac current nation one eurosystem strong support sepa close monitor develop provid guidanc market instanc eurosystem publish regular progress report sepa assess achiev analys obstacl threat issu messag relev stakehold let focus first two instrument credit transfer direct debit introduct sepa credit transfer sct januari first paneuropean retail payment instrument becom avail almost bank activ payment busi europ e bank adher sct scheme e abl offer process sct likewis retail payment infrastructur process credit transfer euro becom sct schemecompli e offer clear settlement sct prepar second european payment instrument sepa direct debit sdd ongo design core servic businesstobusi servic finalis solut requir practic implement issu ongo legal valid exist direct debit mandat reachabl direct debit paye particular multilater interchang fee mif e transact fee payabl payer bank paye bank need transact fee challeng dgcomp european commiss bank sector european commiss european central bank work toward solut time issu need resolv urgent endang launch sdd novemb despit fact sepa project ongo seven year lot product design standardis work undertaken complet success practic implement adopt sepa ultim litmus test success integr retail payment euro area slow instanc exist year total credit transfer volum euro area sct transact bank see respons side corpor public administr bring critic mass payment sepa environ context pleas report ecb migrat payment salari bill etc sepa payment right start sepa januari corpor public administr claim see benefit sepa still take cautious approach toward actual implement one major difficulti cite relat obtain iban bic inform expect provis good qualiti servic deriv iban nation account number reliabl directori servic help overcom obstacl break circl wait see general understand among sepa stakehold establish import plan european payment instrument e sct sdd replac nation payment instrument need migrat end date onward european payment instrument exist know ineffici cost two scheme continu run parallel prolong period time dual process generat economi scale sepa abl deliv hamper stakehold fulli reap benefit maintain nation instrument impli fragment along nation border preserv integr european retail market fail thus work toward establish migrat end date deem utmost import make sepa success last area want bring attent state play secur settlement infrastructur like retail payment market european secur settlement infrastructur remain high fragment despit establish singl currenc owe among thing larg number settlement system eu crossbord settlement cost still much higher domest one time demand integr european settlement infrastructur increas target secur project aim pave way toward grail overcom current fragment secur settlement infrastructur technic platform central secur depositori csds maintain legal relat custom includ custodi notari function target secur provid singl harmonis venu eu asset exchang euro standardis communic protocol furthermor elimin financi exposur crosscsd settlement central bank money settlement thus increas effici collater manag provid posit taker abil optimis financ across eu asset euro target secur constitut major step forward deliveri singl integr secur infrastructur europ target secur project current phase defin general function specif readi end follow develop phase subsequ test migrat phase envisag goliv system parallel target secur project eurosystem launch ccbm project correspond central bank model ccbm common platform manag eurosystem collater e asset pledg eurosystem secur central bank credit oper nation paneuropean basi ccbm fulli compat target target secur creat synergi settlement collater eurosystem credit oper releas relat credit financi institut european financi market come long way integr process progress achiev far howev leav room complac recent disrupt caus financi crisi clear warn us forthcom ecb report financi integr special focus effect financi turmoil state financi integr euro area provid clear evid financi turmoil consider affect latest observ integr indic usual indic financi integr crosscountri standard deviat money market rate govern bond spread deterior gradual past year dramat acceler last month compar avail indic crosscountri data built nation data see interbank rate show sign diverg transact pronounc crossbord one suggest presenc heighten credit liquid risk everywher possibl larger crossbord counterparti given impact current financi turmoil function financi market utmost import act concert coordin manner restor proper function financi system compet author need vigil instabl stop even revers financi integr process eurosystem follow market develop close particular proactiv money market play essenti reintermedi role instrument support function integr money market crisi period payment settlement system shown remark resili shock hit financi world past two year play role safe haven market particip could reli smooth function oper financi turmoil reinforc convict well function stabl integr payment secur settlement infrastructur repres cornerston whole european financi integr process current crisi taken excus slow ongo work market infrastructur sepa target secur ccbm order exploit full potenti bank central bank need implement harmonis system scheme procedur integr harmonis system would lead larger economi scale greater innov better servic therefor precis financi turmoil need strengthen effort toward provid integr effici safe reliabl market infrastructur backbon financi system fascin holi grail may due elus contrast despit recent setback bring european financi integr process complet remain attain goal like knight round tabl market particip policymak need stand front difficulti respond financi crisi support trust financi infrastructur use potenti integr financi market grate monika hempel simon manganelli valuabl input speech figur januari reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en