Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Towards a safer financial system,28-06-2010,European Central Bank,ECB,2440,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,I am very pleased to meet you today here in Brussels to discuss the post-crisis regulatory agenda from a transatlantic perspective. The costs of the crisis have been tremendous on both sides of the Atlantic. Credit market related losses amount up to 731 bn. US dollar in the US and 272 bn. US dollar in the euro area. Capital had to be raised due to the crisis of 519 bn US dollar in the US and 288 billion US dollar in the euro area. Moreover governments on both sides of the Atlantic have committed support to the banking sector of up to 28% of GDP. So, there is no doubt that this crisis has come at the cost of substantially lower profits and great loss in overall income. Therefore, looking at these facts makes one thing very clear: We have to come up with a global reform of the financial system, so to prevent such deep crisis from occurring again. Indeed, it has been one of the key lessons from the financial crisis that financial stability in our highly interconnected financial system can only be achieved through globally consistent and concerted efforts. Leadership of both public and private decision-makers in sustaining an intense international dialogue is therefore essential. Today’s visit of the US Financial Services Roundtable is a very welcome initiative by leaders of the financial services industry to this end. The extraordinary nature and consequences of the global financial crisis have demonstrated the need to reform the financial system. Various weaknesses have been detected and under the aegis of the G20 a comprehensive set of measures have been agreed upon. It is envisaged to strengthen both macro- and micro-prudential supervision as well as to enhance the use of market infrastructure. These measures will need to be complementary and supplementary to one another in order to have the desired effect. For this an intense international dialogue is key.The global agenda for strengthening the financial system is very broad and I will not be able to cover all areas comprehensively today. I will therefore limit my speech to those areas of reform which are of particular importance. I will highlight some important areas as regards the regulatory reform, will touch briefly upon the supervisory reform and will then elaborate on the reform priorities in the area of market infrastructures. The crisis has shown the importance of containing the excessive build-up of leverage in good times and enhancing the overall quality of capital with a view to strengthening the resilience of the financial sector. The package prepared by the Basel Committee covering capital and liquidity reform proposals is very comprehensive and addresses these issues by improving the quality, consistency and transparency of capital for credit institutions, as well as developing a framework for liquidity risk. [The main elements of the proposals are: First, to improve the quality of capital, especially Tier-1 capital to improve loss-absorption on a going concern basis. Second, the introduction of a non-risk-based leverage ratio as a supplementary measure to the Basel II risk control framework aims at curbing the excessive balance sheet growth we have witnessed. Third, the introduction of a range of measures, intended to mitigate the inherent pro-cyclicality of the financial system. And lastly, the introduction of capital buffers and forward-looking provisioning should ensure that the financial system absorbs the shocks and thus evening the volatility of the financial and real economic cycles.] As you know, quantitative impact assessments have been conducted in order to assess the cumulative impact of the reform on financial institutions and on the real economy. As the preliminary results will be discussed at the July meeting of the Basel Committee, it would be premature to take a position on matters such as the desirable calibration. But let me just make two points. Firstly, from a conceptual point of view the ECB supports the proposed measures, particularly in light of the lessons learned from the crisis. Secondly, the ECB is of the view that notwithstanding the outcome of the impact assessments, we should not weaken the standards. It would be preferable that where relevant a longer transition period is agreed upon, balancing the need for enhancing banking stability and maintaining the stable provision of credit to the economy.The crisis has also highlighted the particular importance of so-called systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs). Therefore another important part of the regulatory reform is the need to reduce the moral hazard associated with systemically important financial institutions. It will be key to find ways how SIFIs can internalise the potential costs they pose to the financial system. This could be achieved by the introduction of additional prudential measures, for instance through capital surcharges or contingent capital instruments, liquidity surcharges, more intrusive supervision, and/or the introduction of bank levies. Although work is still underway and the Financial Stability Board is expected to provide recommendations to the G20 summit of November in Seoul, the European Council has recently agreed that EU Member States should introduce systems of levies and taxes on financial institutions to ensure fair burden-sharing and to set incentives to contain systemic risk. As regards these initiatives, I would like to underline that the ECB has always been supportive of exploring the feasibility of such measures. However, for such measures to have the desired effect, it is important that an internationally coordinated solution is ensured. I am also of the view that any contribution by financial institutions should be complementary and coherent with supervisory and regulatory regimes. Sequencing of the implementation of measures is thus of utmost importance. Finally, it is important that the higher overall cost of funding is not passed on to the customers, for instance in the form of higher lending rates/fees or lower remuneration on deposits. Another important area of regulatory reform is the efforts underway to achieve a single set of high-quality global and independent accounting standards by June 2011. In order to have a sound regulatory framework having high-quality and convergent accounting standards is crucial. We have to ensure that the current gap between the IFRS and US GAAP narrow rather than widen. It seems that the current FASB proposals on classification and measurement of financial instruments would result in more financial instruments to be measured at fair value, leading to an overall expansion of fair value accounting. Accepting this would not address some of the key lessons from the financial crisis, namely that fair value accounting does not always provide decision-useful information and it may exacerbate pro-cyclical effects. In addition, an expansion of fair value accounting would be in direct contradiction to the “mixed measurement model” as endorsed by the IASB, and therefore represent a major setback on achieving accounting convergence. Let me turn to briefly touch on the progress with the supervisory reform. If there is one uncontested lesson from the crisis it is the need to further develop the capacity of the authorities to conduct macroprudential supervision. The ultimate aim of macro-prudential policies is to contain the build up of financial vulnerabilities and ensure that the financial system is able to withstand their unwinding, minimising potential spill-overs to the real economy.An effective macro-prudential framework aims at delivering a thorough analysis of systemic risks, as well as the formulation of appropriate policies to address such risks identifying, in a timely fashion, the emergence and build up of critical vulnerabilities, and deciding on effective (pre-emptive) intervention. In Europe a new body will be set up: the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). It will be responsible for the macro-prudential supervision of the EU financial system. The key task of the ESRB will be to identify and assess risks to the stability of the EU financial system and issue risk warnings when the identified risks appear to be significant and policy recommendations for remedial action. I am happy that with its involvement in the ESRB, the ECB will continue to play an active role in safeguarding the financial stability in Europe. Let me now turn to the priorities as regards financial market infrastructures. Financial market infrastructures underpin the stability of the financial system. By applying highly sophisticated standardised risk management procedures and enabling multilateral netting and risk-sharing, infrastructures provide both very resilient and efficient risk management services to their users. Market infrastructures can also act as centralised sources of information for authorities and the public, thereby enhancing market transparency and facilitating the early detection of financial imbalances. Furthermore, by interposing themselves between trading counterparties, infrastructures can reduce the interconnectedness between major financial institutions and the associated contagion risks. Therefore, it might not be a surprise that market infrastructures have been soundly withstanding the storm of the financial crisis. Still, I would like to draw your attention to three main policy priorities regarding financial infrastructures in light of the lessons from the financial crisis.The first priority relates to the development of financial infrastructures in those markets where they are not yet sufficiently used or available, notably in OTC derivatives markets. The crisis has shown that markets with adequate infrastructures and hence proper risk management and risk provisions have proven to be more resilient than markets without such infrastructures, such as the OTC derivatives markets. Therefore, expanding the use of central counterparties (CCPs) in these increasingly systemically relevant markets is a key measure to reduce counterparty and operational risk. Another important step is the mandatory reporting of all trades to centralised trade registries, so-called trade repositories, in order to enhance market transparency. In my view, if CCPs and trade repositories for credit default swaps had been available before the Lehman default, Lehman’s CDS exposures could have been managed in a much more transparent and resilient way and could have mitigated the negative chain reaction on CDS markets that followed the demise of Lehman. CCPs and trade repositories for OTC derivatives are ultimately beneficial for all stakeholders. Still, there are the well-known challenges of effective collective action in the context of the provision of public goods. Hence, private sector efforts alone may not suffice to foster sufficient progress towards the use of CCPs and trade repositories for OTC derivatives. It is therefore important to adopt and implement the regulatory requirements for the mandatory central clearing of all eligible products and the reporting of trades to trade repositories in a timely manner. Given, however, the global nature of OTC derivatives markets, it is clear that such regulatory tools will only be successful if they are applied in a coordinated manner around the globe. I strongly support the recently launched work of the Financial Stability Board to develop common approaches to fostering the central clearing of eligible OTC derivatives as well as to expand the range of potentially clearable products through enhanced standardisation.The second priority relates to the need for updated and globally consistent requirements to ensure the safety and soundness of financial infrastructures. By nature of their business, financial infrastructures concentrate systemic risk, owing to their large size, their limited degree of substitutability and the strong web of mutual interdependencies across infrastructures, e.g. arising from exposures to the same large participants. Increased reliance on market infrastructures across financial markets further underlines the importance of effectively addressing this risk. Therefore, it is crucial to ensure that CCPs are able to manage these specific risks related to the clearing of OTC derivatives. Furthermore, trade repositories need to be designed, operated and overseen in an adequate manner, given the novelty of these infrastructures and the reliance of other market infrastructures, public authorities and market participants on the accuracy and availability of the respective data. Two complementary strands of work are underway in these fields. First, legislation for OTC derivatives CCPs and trade repositories is being developed in several countries. And second, the international standards for financial market infrastructures are currently being reviewed by the CPSS and IOSCO. In this respect I believe that given the importance of a globally consistent framework for market infrastructures, it is critical to ensure that all relevant national and regional legislation is drafted in a sufficiently flexible way to allow for the effective accommodation of the work of standard-setters.The final priority I would like to stress does not relate to measures directly targeting market infrastructures themselves, but is closely related to this work: the need for improving bilateral post-trading processes in line with the requirements for market infrastructures. It is clear that without adequate bilateral risk management and disclosure, a comprehensive mitigation of systemic risk arising in post-trading could not be achieved. Moreover, an uneven regulatory level playing field could create scope for regulatory arbitrage and provide disincentives for the use of market infrastructure. As a concrete example for necessary regulatory attention, let me mention the risk management standards for the bilateral clearing of OTC derivatives. While - as mentioned before - in principle OTC derivatives should be centrally cleared to the extent possible, some products are not suitable for central clearing, for instance owing to insufficient product standardisation, lack of market liquidity or limited availability of robust prices. At the same time, trades that are not suitable for central clearing pose particular risk management challenges given their more bespoke and opaque nature. Therefore, in my view, capital charges and collateralisation requirements for bilaterally cleared trades must be at least as stringent as the requirements for CCPs to ensure a sufficiently robust buffer against adverse market developments, operational and counterparty risks. I welcome that banking supervisors around the world are developing strengthened frameworks in this regard, working in step with the revision of global prudential standards that is currently under development by the Basel Committee. Ladies and gentlemen, allow me to conclude. The regulatory reform, the new emphasis placed on macro-prudential supervision and the measures to strengthen financial market infrastructures, are all key elements on our path towards greater financial stability and an important complement to strengthened risk management and disclosure at the level of financial institutions. More specifically, it is now of key importance that the proposed legislation concerning the enhancement of the EU institutional framework and in particular the establishment of the ESRB will be finally agreed, so as to allow its start – as planned – by January 2011.Given the interconnectedness of our financial institutions and financial markets it is essential that an internationally consistent framework is created, ensuring a level playing field for financial institutions. Gatherings like the one today serve as a good forum to further enhance our understanding of the issues we are facing and will thus contribute to reaching efficient and workable solutions. Therefore, I very much believe that a continuous and effective transatlantic dialogue is fundamental. Thank you for your attention.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen pleas meet today brussel discuss postcrisi regulatori agenda transatlant perspect cost crisi tremend side atlant credit market relat loss amount bn us dollar us bn us dollar euro area capit rais due crisi bn us dollar us billion us dollar euro area moreov govern side atlant commit support bank sector gdp doubt crisi come cost substanti lower profit great loss overal incom therefor look fact make one thing clear come global reform financi system prevent deep crisi occur inde one key lesson financi crisi financi stabil high interconnect financi system achiev global consist concert effort leadership public privat decisionmak sustain intens intern dialogu therefor essenti today visit us financi servic roundtabl welcom initi leader financi servic industri end extraordinari natur consequ global financi crisi demonstr need reform financi system various weak detect aegi g comprehens set measur agre upon envisag strengthen macro microprudenti supervis well enhanc use market infrastructur measur need complementari supplementari one anoth order desir effect intens intern dialogu key global agenda strengthen financi system broad abl cover area comprehens today therefor limit speech area reform particular import highlight import area regard regulatori reform touch briefli upon supervisori reform elabor reform prioriti area market infrastructur crisi shown import contain excess buildup leverag good time enhanc overal qualiti capit view strengthen resili financi sector packag prepar basel committe cover capit liquid reform propos comprehens address issu improv qualiti consist transpar capit credit institut well develop framework liquid risk main element propos first improv qualiti capit especi tier capit improv lossabsorpt go concern basi second introduct nonriskbas leverag ratio supplementari measur basel ii risk control framework aim curb excess balanc sheet growth wit third introduct rang measur intend mitig inher procycl financi system last introduct capit buffer forwardlook provis ensur financi system absorb shock thus even volatil financi real econom cycl know quantit impact assess conduct order assess cumul impact reform financi institut real economi preliminari result discuss juli meet basel committe would prematur take posit matter desir calibr let make two point first conceptu point view ecb support propos measur particular light lesson learn crisi second ecb view notwithstand outcom impact assess weaken standard would prefer relev longer transit period agre upon balanc need enhanc bank stabil maintain stabl provis credit economi crisi also highlight particular import socal system import financi institut sifi therefor anoth import part regulatori reform need reduc moral hazard associ system import financi institut key find way sifi internalis potenti cost pose financi system could achiev introduct addit prudenti measur instanc capit surcharg conting capit instrument liquid surcharg intrus supervis andor introduct bank levi although work still underway financi stabil board expect provid recommend g summit novemb seoul european council recent agre eu member state introduc system levi tax financi institut ensur fair burdenshar set incent contain system risk regard initi would like underlin ecb alway support explor feasibl measur howev measur desir effect import intern coordin solut ensur also view contribut financi institut complementari coher supervisori regulatori regim sequenc implement measur thus utmost import final import higher overal cost fund pass custom instanc form higher lend ratesfe lower remuner deposit anoth import area regulatori reform effort underway achiev singl set highqual global independ account standard june order sound regulatori framework highqual converg account standard crucial ensur current gap ifr us gaap narrow rather widen seem current fasb propos classif measur financi instrument would result financi instrument measur fair valu lead overal expans fair valu account accept would address key lesson financi crisi name fair valu account alway provid decisionus inform may exacerb procycl effect addit expans fair valu account would direct contradict mix measur model endors iasb therefor repres major setback achiev account converg let turn briefli touch progress supervisori reform one uncontest lesson crisi need develop capac author conduct macroprudenti supervis ultim aim macroprudenti polici contain build financi vulner ensur financi system abl withstand unwind minimis potenti spillov real economi effect macroprudenti framework aim deliv thorough analysi system risk well formul appropri polici address risk identifi time fashion emerg build critic vulner decid effect preemptiv intervent europ new bodi set european system risk board esrb respons macroprudenti supervis eu financi system key task esrb identifi assess risk stabil eu financi system issu risk warn identifi risk appear signific polici recommend remedi action happi involv esrb ecb continu play activ role safeguard financi stabil europ let turn prioriti regard financi market infrastructur financi market infrastructur underpin stabil financi system appli high sophist standardis risk manag procedur enabl multilater net riskshar infrastructur provid resili effici risk manag servic user market infrastructur also act centralis sourc inform author public therebi enhanc market transpar facilit earli detect financi imbal furthermor interpos trade counterparti infrastructur reduc interconnected major financi institut associ contagion risk therefor might surpris market infrastructur sound withstand storm financi crisi still would like draw attent three main polici prioriti regard financi infrastructur light lesson financi crisi first prioriti relat develop financi infrastructur market yet suffici use avail notabl otc deriv market crisi shown market adequ infrastructur henc proper risk manag risk provis proven resili market without infrastructur otc deriv market therefor expand use central counterparti ccps increas system relev market key measur reduc counterparti oper risk anoth import step mandatori report trade centralis trade registri socal trade repositori order enhanc market transpar view ccps trade repositori credit default swap avail lehman default lehman cds exposur could manag much transpar resili way could mitig negat chain reaction cds market follow demis lehman ccps trade repositori otc deriv ultim benefici stakehold still wellknown challeng effect collect action context provis public good henc privat sector effort alon may suffic foster suffici progress toward use ccps trade repositori otc deriv therefor import adopt implement regulatori requir mandatori central clear elig product report trade trade repositori time manner given howev global natur otc deriv market clear regulatori tool success appli coordin manner around globe strong support recent launch work financi stabil board develop common approach foster central clear elig otc deriv well expand rang potenti clearabl product enhanc standardis second prioriti relat need updat global consist requir ensur safeti sound financi infrastructur natur busi financi infrastructur concentr system risk owe larg size limit degre substitut strong web mutual interdepend across infrastructur e g aris exposur larg particip increas relianc market infrastructur across financi market underlin import effect address risk therefor crucial ensur ccps abl manag specif risk relat clear otc deriv furthermor trade repositori need design oper overseen adequ manner given novelti infrastructur relianc market infrastructur public author market particip accuraci avail respect data two complementari strand work underway field first legisl otc deriv ccps trade repositori develop sever countri second intern standard financi market infrastructur current review cpss iosco respect believ given import global consist framework market infrastructur critic ensur relev nation region legisl draft suffici flexibl way allow effect accommod work standardsett final prioriti would like stress relat measur direct target market infrastructur close relat work need improv bilater posttrad process line requir market infrastructur clear without adequ bilater risk manag disclosur comprehens mitig system risk aris posttrad could achiev moreov uneven regulatori level play field could creat scope regulatori arbitrag provid disincent use market infrastructur concret exampl necessari regulatori attent let mention risk manag standard bilater clear otc deriv mention principl otc deriv central clear extent possibl product suitabl central clear instanc owe insuffici product standardis lack market liquid limit avail robust price time trade suitabl central clear pose particular risk manag challeng given bespok opaqu natur therefor view capit charg collateralis requir bilater clear trade must least stringent requir ccps ensur suffici robust buffer advers market develop oper counterparti risk welcom bank supervisor around world develop strengthen framework regard work step revis global prudenti standard current develop basel committe ladi gentlemen allow conclud regulatori reform new emphasi place macroprudenti supervis measur strengthen financi market infrastructur key element path toward greater financi stabil import complement strengthen risk manag disclosur level financi institut specif key import propos legisl concern enhanc eu institut framework particular establish esrb final agre allow start plan januari given interconnected financi institut financi market essenti intern consist framework creat ensur level play field financi institut gather like one today serv good forum enhanc understand issu face thus contribut reach effici workabl solut therefor much believ continu effect transatlant dialogu fundament thank attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en