Benoît Cœuré: Currency fluctuations: the limits to benign neglect,02-04-2013,European Central Bank,ECB,2627,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen [1],I would like to thank the Peterson Institute for the invitation to speak in this panel.In my remarks today, I wish to consider the current debate on competitive devaluations and the peril of a currency war.Large policy spillovers in an increasingly integrated world economy naturally raise the possibility of inefficiencies. National policy-makers, who pursue a domestic objective and ignore the externalities they impose on other countries, may find themselves in equilibria that entail collective welfare losses. Policies that are efficient for the global economy are not necessarily optimal from the national vantage point, and there is a temptation to shift the burden and costs of adjustment abroad, and maximise the net gains accruing to national residents. A classic example of the application of this framework to monetary policy is Ragnar Nurkse’s well-known analysis of the devaluations that took place in the interwar period. Since then, concerns about spirals of competitive devaluations have motivated the design of institutions and rules – from the Bretton Woods arrangements of 1944 to the Group of Twenty – to prevent countries from adopting “beggar thy neighbour” policies [2]. The lessons from the crises of the interwar period continue to have an impact on policy discussions today, as the world economy is adjusting to the Great Recession.Some central banks in major industrialised countries are currently pursuing, or have announced policy measures to stem entrenched deflationary pressures and bring down unemployment levels. Because policy interest rates are at or close to their lower bound in these economies, monetary easing has taken the form of non-standard measures, such as forward guidance concerning the path of future policy rates, and/or quantitative easing. These measures have had domestic effects (e.g. raising inflation expectations); but as it is a standard outcome of monetary policy easing, have also exerted some depreciation pressures on the currency of the respective country. The question I want to address is the following: should policy-makers, especially those in large countries whose currency is appreciating, be concerned by these developments? Do the latter pose a challenge to the G20 international cooperation policy agenda?Taking mainly the perspective of a large currency area, I will first outline the conditions under which the answer to the above question is “No”. In the process, I will also argue that there is a misleading “Panglossian” view that is emerging, namely that competitive devaluations are an efficient way to coordinate national policies on the global task of taking the world economy out of a deflationary trap. I will then contend that competitive devaluations, if aggressively pursued, would be quite harmful, due to the constraints faced by policy-makers in most countries in today's environment.Typically, sustained exchange rate movements affect policy objectives (e.g. inflation and output) and hence demand offsetting policy actions. Other things being equal, these policy actions, by resisting the exchange rate movement to a degree, will re-establish the original target outcomes over the relevant horizon. So, to the extent that such offsetting policy actions are unconstrained and also pose no trade-offs, and the exchange rate is not per se a target (namely under a floating exchange rate regime), there is little or no scope for effective currency manipulations. This is by and large the environment in which the ECB operates. The exchange rate is not a policy target for the ECB; however, it matters for price stability and growth and, as such, it is part of the overall assessment of the appropriateness of the policy stance. If contrary to the objective of medium term price stability, it may thus trigger offsetting policy actions.An important aspect of the consequences of an exchange rate movement resulting from a monetary policy shock abroad is that it brings about few trade-offs for domestic monetary policy-makers. Currency appreciation would tend to have effects of the same sign on inflation and growth. However, exchange rate movements reflecting other forces, particularly those resulting in severe misalignments, would not have such benign consequences. Currency swings disconnected from fundamentals, or brought about by misguided policies, have the potential to become disruptive.The empirical evidence on the cross-border effects of standard monetary policy shocks in major economies suggests the following. A monetary easing, say in the US, while depreciating the dollar, is associated with a fall in net exports and a global output expansion; interest rates also decrease in other countries. [3] Therefore, if foreign policy measures, e.g. in the form of forward guidance, can be readily matched with domestic policy actions, we should not worry about the risk of a loss of competitiveness. In addition, a foreign policy expansion might not require a domestic response that fully neutralises the exchange rate movement if there are sources of overall positive spillovers, in particular through increased foreign demand. Objectives in terms of inflation and output gaps can then be achieved despite some currency appreciation.The previous argument should not be confused with an emerging “Panglossian” perspective [4] which posits that competitive devaluations triggering an exchange rate “arms race” would be welcome in the current conjuncture. The argument put forward is that, contrary to a tariff war that leaves everybody worse off, such a race would generate a needed global, coordinated monetary expansion. This view rests on the assumption that monetary policy-makers should do more than they are currently doing. Chasing an exchange rate depreciation would make up for a perceived lack of action and deliver the appropriate symmetric policy response. However, there is no such lack of action in advanced economies, where monetary policy has been and is likely to remain very accommodative. Moreover, the “Panglossian” approach to coordination may create difficulties of its own, as I shall illustrate later on. It would be simplistic to think that countries should always put up with any exchange rate movement generated by policy actions abroad, when the latter aim to address domestic problems and are not carried out through overt currency manipulations. Let me list here three reasons why there are limits to non-cooperative policy responses to exchange rate movements following foreign monetary policy shocks.First, it is true that starting in the mid-1980s the economic literature by and large finds only modest gains from international policy cooperation. [5] This consensus, although not undisputed, [6] has been reinforced by the paradigm shift in international macroeconomic theory from the Mundell-Fleming-Dornbusch model to the New Open Economy Macroeconomics. [7] However, the workhorse open-economy model underlying those results describes a benign, frictionless environment, with only moderate macroeconomic interdependence. These theoretical economies are in an ideal state of “divine coincidence”: one policy instrument suffices to achieve all targets, quite independently of policy decisions abroad. [8] In the real world, a number of market frictions – in particular of a financial nature – have been identified as channels of large cross-country spillovers and, hence, as potential sources of non-trivial gains from cooperation – particularly concerning unconventional policies. [9] The ever stronger global integration of trade in goods and services and, in particular, in financial markets makes the issue of central bank cooperation ever more relevant today.Second, a group of large, systemically relevant economies has not been affected symmetrically by the crisis. As noted by Barry Eichengreen [10], this is an important difference with the interwar period. Insofar as they have decoupled from advanced economies, the main policy concern in emerging market economies has been inflationary pressures, and in some cases, growth rates and asset prices that are too strong rather than too weak. Rather than resorting to tighter macroeconomic policies, these countries may instead be tempted to fight back against currency appreciation. To deal with the ensuing pro-cyclical bias, they might opt for second-best measures designed to limit capital inflows and/or moderate their domestic impact; the effectiveness of which remains unascertained. [11] Likewise, small open economies which find it desirable to peg their exchange rates also have little room to react, unless the easing is undertaken in their anchor currency. Even then, their ability to deliver domestic monetary easing may be hampered by the lack of domestic assets available for quantitative easing.Third, central banks in the advanced countries are close to reaching the limits of their conventional policies, or are already undertaking unconventional ones, such as quantitative easing. The operational difficulties that would surround additional non-standard measures and doubts over their traction on domestic aggregate demand suggest that there is at least an implicit cost in responding to further negative developments, as an exchange rate appreciation would be for many economies. This is particularly likely to be the case when the transmission of monetary policy is hampered by persistent structural rigidities, as it is the case in large parts of the euro area today. In situations in which it becomes difficult to generate monetary policy stimuli for domestic economies, the “coordinated” expansion unwittingly resulting from a currency war would not provide more room for manoeuvre for policy-makers. To the contrary, the “Panglossian” approach may only result in a global inflationary bias.In the light of these constraints, it would be a matter of concern if countries were to directly pursue overt competitive devaluations, particularly by resorting to large purchases of foreign assets. [12] Moving to expenditure-switching policies would in effect create a zero sum game and expose global markets to serious risks of an escalation of trade and financial protectionism.As much as exchange rate movements are the natural result of policies aimed at achieving sound and legitimate domestic targets, such as price stability, and as long as other central banks are not constrained in their ability to take offsetting actions, there is no reason for concern. Keeping one’s own house in order, however, is quite different from sticking one’s head in the sand. Especially in the current conjuncture, the room for policy actions might be reduced, or countervailing interventions might have become more costly. Then, large and sustained currency swings might hinder the achievement of domestic targets.I am inclined to believe that global economic circumstances are currently far from the ideal case of “divine coincidence” where one policy instrument would suffice to achieve all targets. Although they are on a clear path to recovery, financial markets in advanced economies are still fragile and the real economy is at best giving timid signs of improvement. There are some concerns that non-standard policies would not gain enough traction on domestic aggregate demand because of deleveraging by domestic agents, including banks. This would leave the exchange rate as the residual macro-policy instrument, with forward guidance but especially quantitative easing mainly operating via external channels. Under these circumstances, the temptation to divert global demand and foreign capital towards the domestic economy at the expense of other ailing countries could be dangerously alluring. It is during times like these that the international community has to display an ability to reach mutually beneficial agreements, while recognising the legitimate ambition of each country to solve its domestic problems. The economic literature highlights the dangers of individual countries pursuing “beggar they neighbour” or “burden-shifting” policies. I believe this message is well understood by central bankers  We strive to conduct policies in a cooperative spirit as much as possible. There have been several initiatives at global level to foster monetary cooperation. The commitment by G20 leaders to build a more stable and resilient international monetary system, as reaffirmed at the Cannes summit, is echoed for instance in the CGFS report on global liquidity [13], which develops a framework for the analysis of global liquidity cycles, as well as in the IMF’s work on the multilateral aspects of policies affecting global capital flows [14]. The recent G7 statement on exchange rates also reflects this cooperative spirit, as well as the G20 communiqué subsequently adopted.This kind of cooperation seems different from the way it is treated in theoretical models, where cooperation takes the form of policy-makers agreeing on a configuration of policies to maximise global welfare. [15] I do not think this difference matters. For me, the main value added coming from the economic literature consists in identifying and quantifying the implications for welfare of spillovers across economies and policies. Cooperation between the ECB and other major central banks is and will remain extensive and effective, building on a common ground of shared experience and mutual trust.Thank you for your attention.[1]I wish to thank Luca Dedola and Giovanni Lombardo for their contributions to this speech and Georges Pineau for his remarks. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.[2]See B. Bernanke (2013), ""Monetary Policy and the Global Economy"", Remarks at the Department of Economics and Suntory and Toyota International Centres for Economics and Related Disciplines, Public Discussion in Association with the Bank of England, London School of Economics, London, 25 March; and B. Eichengreen (2013), ""Currency wars or international policy coordination?"", University of California, Berkeley.[3]See the key contributions by S. Kim and N. Roubini (2000) “Exchange rate anomalies in the industrial countries: A solution with a structural VAR approach”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 45 pp. 561-586; and Kim (2001) “International transmission of U.S. monetary policy shocks: Evidence from VAR's,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 48, pp. 339-372.[4]“In truth, the so-called “currency war” is not all bad: if everyone debases their currency, the world will get closer to the monetary stimulus necessary to outweigh excessive fiscal zeal”, from “G20 in search of recovery”, Financial Times 14 February 2013, http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/cec13222-76a2-11e2-8569-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2O5GVvOZi [5]See the classic contribution by G. Oudiz, and J. Sachs (1984), “Macroeconomic Policy Coordination among the Industrial Economies,” Brookings Paper on Economic Activity 15(1), pp. 1-76. For a survey of this literature, see the book by M. Canzoneri and D. Henderson (1991), “Monetary Policy in Interdependent Economies”, MIT Press, Cambridge MA. [6]W. McKibbin (1997). “Empirical evidence on international economic policy coordination”, in M. Fratianni, D. Salvatore and J. Von Hagen (eds.), Handbook of Comparative Economic Policies, Greenwood Press.[7]The seminal paper studying international monetary cooperation in this new paradigm is the now classic paper by M. Obstfeld and K. Rogoff (2002), “Global Implications of Self-Oriented National Monetary Rules”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp. 503-535. This paper found that the welfare gains from monetary cooperation are very small.[8]This term was used by Blanchard, O., & Gali, J. (2007) (“Real Wage Rigidities and the New Keynesian model”; Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 39, pp. 35-65) to refer to closed economy models where all gaps can be easily closed by policy-makers. More generally, it has been used to describe all cases, also in open economy models, where trade-offs are absent or negligible.[9]See, for example, Dedola, L., P. Karadi & G. Lombardo (2013), “Global implications of self-oriented unconventional policies”, Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.[10]See B. Eichengreen ( op. cit.).[11]It has been argued however that capital flows to emerging market economies have been driven as much by ""pull"" factors at home as by ""push"" factors originating abroad, see M. Fratzscher, M. Lo Duca and R. Straub (2012), “A Global Monetary Tsunami? On the Spillovers of US Quantitative Easing,” CEPR Discussion Paper, No. 9195. Also, as recalled by B. Bernanke (op. cit.), empirical simulations suggest that the drag on the competitiveness of emerging market economies and the output spillovers arising from accommodative monetary policies in the advanced economies are roughly offsetting.[12]See J. Gagnon (2013), “The Elephant Hiding in the Room: Currency Intervention and Trade Imbalances”. Peterson Institute Working Paper 13-2.[13]BIS (2011): Global liquidity - concept, measurement and policy implications, CGFS Publications No 45 November 2011. ( http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs45.pdf)[14] IMF (2011): The Multilateral Aspects of Policies Affecting Capital Flows, ( http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2011/101311.pdf))[15]International exchanges of information do not necessarily produce better outcomes, as shown e.g. by J. Frankel and K. Rockett (1988), “International macroeconomic policy coordination when policy-makers disagree on the model”, American Economic Review 78. For a survey of this literature, see also A. Ghosh and P. Masson (1994), “Economic cooperation in an uncertain world”, Blackwell, Oxford. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen would like thank peterson institut invit speak panel remark today wish consid current debat competit devalu peril currenc war larg polici spillov increas integr world economi natur rais possibl ineffici nation policymak pursu domest object ignor extern impos countri may find equilibria entail collect welfar loss polici effici global economi necessarili optim nation vantag point temptat shift burden cost adjust abroad maximis net gain accru nation resid classic exampl applic framework monetari polici ragnar nurks wellknown analysi devalu took place interwar period sinc concern spiral competit devalu motiv design institut rule bretton wood arrang group twenti prevent countri adopt beggar thi neighbour polici lesson crise interwar period continu impact polici discuss today world economi adjust great recess central bank major industrialis countri current pursu announc polici measur stem entrench deflationari pressur bring unemploy level polici interest rate close lower bound economi monetari eas taken form nonstandard measur forward guidanc concern path futur polici rate andor quantit eas measur domest effect e g rais inflat expect standard outcom monetari polici eas also exert depreci pressur currenc respect countri question want address follow policymak especi larg countri whose currenc appreci concern develop latter pose challeng g intern cooper polici agenda take main perspect larg currenc area first outlin condit answer question process also argu mislead panglossian view emerg name competit devalu effici way coordin nation polici global task take world economi deflationari trap contend competit devalu aggress pursu would quit harm due constraint face policymak countri today environ typic sustain exchang rate movement affect polici object e g inflat output henc demand offset polici action thing equal polici action resist exchang rate movement degre reestablish origin target outcom relev horizon extent offset polici action unconstrain also pose tradeoff exchang rate per se target name float exchang rate regim littl scope effect currenc manipul larg environ ecb oper exchang rate polici target ecb howev matter price stabil growth part overal assess appropri polici stanc contrari object medium term price stabil may thus trigger offset polici action import aspect consequ exchang rate movement result monetari polici shock abroad bring tradeoff domest monetari policymak currenc appreci would tend effect sign inflat growth howev exchang rate movement reflect forc particular result sever misalign would benign consequ currenc swing disconnect fundament brought misguid polici potenti becom disrupt empir evid crossbord effect standard monetari polici shock major economi suggest follow monetari eas say us depreci dollar associ fall net export global output expans interest rate also decreas countri therefor foreign polici measur e g form forward guidanc readili match domest polici action worri risk loss competit addit foreign polici expans might requir domest respons fulli neutralis exchang rate movement sourc overal posit spillov particular increas foreign demand object term inflat output gap achiev despit currenc appreci previous argument confus emerg panglossian perspect posit competit devalu trigger exchang rate arm race would welcom current conjunctur argument put forward contrari tariff war leav everybodi wors race would generat need global coordin monetari expans view rest assumpt monetari policymak current chase exchang rate depreci would make perceiv lack action deliv appropri symmetr polici respons howev lack action advanc economi monetari polici like remain accommod moreov panglossian approach coordin may creat difficulti shall illustr later would simplist think countri alway put exchang rate movement generat polici action abroad latter aim address domest problem carri overt currenc manipul let list three reason limit noncoop polici respons exchang rate movement follow foreign monetari polici shock first true start mid econom literatur larg find modest gain intern polici cooper consensus although undisput reinforc paradigm shift intern macroeconom theori mundellflemingdornbusch model new open economi macroeconom howev workhors openeconomi model under result describ benign frictionless environ moder macroeconom interdepend theoret economi ideal state divin coincid one polici instrument suffic achiev target quit independ polici decis abroad real world number market friction particular financi natur identifi channel larg crosscountri spillov henc potenti sourc nontrivi gain cooper particular concern unconvent polici ever stronger global integr trade good servic particular financi market make issu central bank cooper ever relev today second group larg system relev economi affect symmetr crisi note barri eichengreen import differ interwar period insofar decoupl advanc economi main polici concern emerg market economi inflationari pressur case growth rate asset price strong rather weak rather resort tighter macroeconom polici countri may instead tempt fight back currenc appreci deal ensu procycl bias might opt secondbest measur design limit capit inflow andor moder domest impact effect remain unascertain likewis small open economi find desir peg exchang rate also littl room react unless eas undertaken anchor currenc even abil deliv domest monetari eas may hamper lack domest asset avail quantit eas third central bank advanc countri close reach limit convent polici alreadi undertak unconvent one quantit eas oper difficulti would surround addit nonstandard measur doubt traction domest aggreg demand suggest least implicit cost respond negat develop exchang rate appreci would mani economi particular like case transmiss monetari polici hamper persist structur rigid case larg part euro area today situat becom difficult generat monetari polici stimuli domest economi coordin expans unwit result currenc war would provid room manoeuvr policymak contrari panglossian approach may result global inflationari bias light constraint would matter concern countri direct pursu overt competit devalu particular resort larg purchas foreign asset move expenditureswitch polici would effect creat zero sum game expos global market serious risk escal trade financi protection much exchang rate movement natur result polici aim achiev sound legitim domest target price stabil long central bank constrain abil take offset action reason concern keep one hous order howev quit differ stick one head sand especi current conjunctur room polici action might reduc countervail intervent might becom cost larg sustain currenc swing might hinder achiev domest target inclin believ global econom circumst current far ideal case divin coincid one polici instrument would suffic achiev target although clear path recoveri financi market advanc economi still fragil real economi best give timid sign improv concern nonstandard polici would gain enough traction domest aggreg demand deleverag domest agent includ bank would leav exchang rate residu macropolici instrument forward guidanc especi quantit eas main oper via extern channel circumst temptat divert global demand foreign capit toward domest economi expens ail countri could danger allur time like intern communiti display abil reach mutual benefici agreement recognis legitim ambit countri solv domest problem econom literatur highlight danger individu countri pursu beggar neighbour burdenshift polici believ messag well understood central banker strive conduct polici cooper spirit much possibl sever initi global level foster monetari cooper commit g leader build stabl resili intern monetari system reaffirm cann summit echo instanc cgfs report global liquid develop framework analysi global liquid cycl well imf work multilater aspect polici affect global capit flow recent g statement exchang rate also reflect cooper spirit well g communiqué subsequ adopt kind cooper seem differ way treat theoret model cooper take form policymak agre configur polici maximis global welfar think differ matter main valu ad come econom literatur consist identifi quantifi implic welfar spillov across economi polici cooper ecb major central bank remain extens effect build common ground share experi mutual trust thank attent wish thank luca dedola giovanni lombardo contribut speech georg pineau remark remain sole respons opinion contain herein see b bernank monetari polici global economi remark depart econom suntori toyota intern centr econom relat disciplin public discuss associ bank england london school econom london march b eichengreen currenc war intern polici coordin univers california berkeley see key contribut kim n roubini exchang rate anomali industri countri solut structur var approach journal monetari econom vol pp kim intern transmiss u monetari polici shock evid var journal monetari econom vol pp truth socal currenc war bad everyon debas currenc world get closer monetari stimulus necessari outweigh excess fiscal zeal g search recoveri financi time februari http www ft comintlcmss cec e feabdc html axzz o gvvozi see classic contribut g oudiz j sach macroeconom polici coordin among industri economi brook paper econom activ pp survey literatur see book m canzoneri d henderson monetari polici interdepend economi mit press cambridg ma w mckibbin empir evid intern econom polici coordin m fratianni d salvator j von hagen ed handbook compar econom polici greenwood press semin paper studi intern monetari cooper new paradigm classic paper m obstfeld k rogoff global implic selfori nation monetari rule quarter journal econom pp paper found welfar gain monetari cooper small term use blanchard o gali j real wage rigid new keynesian model journal money credit bank vol pp refer close economi model gap easili close policymak general use describ case also open economi model tradeoff absent neglig see exampl dedola l p karadi g lombardo global implic selfori unconvent polici journal monetari econom forthcom see b eichengreen op cit argu howev capit flow emerg market economi driven much pull factor home push factor origin abroad see m fratzscher m lo duca r straub global monetari tsunami spillov us quantit eas cepr discuss paper also recal b bernank op cit empir simul suggest drag competit emerg market economi output spillov aris accommod monetari polici advanc economi rough offset see j gagnon eleph hide room currenc intervent trade imbal peterson institut work paper bis global liquid concept measur polici implic cgfs public novemb http www bis orgpublcgf pdf imf multilater aspect polici affect capit flow http www imf orgexternalnpppeng pdf intern exchang inform necessarili produc better outcom shown e g j frankel k rockett intern macroeconom polici coordin policymak disagre model american econom review survey literatur see also ghosh p masson econom cooper uncertain world blackwel oxford reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en