José Manuel González-Páramo: The ECB’s monetary policy during the crisis,21-10-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,4096,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a great pleasure for me to be here and to discuss with you the ECB’s monetary policy during the crisis. I wish I could talk about the financial crisis in the past tense. The last time I had the opportunity to talk about these issues in Malaga was, when I had the honour of receiving the title of Doctor Honoris Causa from this prestigious university in June. Unfortunately, since then, the sovereign debt crisis has reached a new intensity. As you may know, this has led the Governing Council of the ECB, in its recent meeting on 6th October, to adopt additional monetary policy measures in the form of a commitment to continue the fixed-rate full allotment policy at least until the middle of 2012, the allotment of two long-term refinancing operations of approximately 12 and 13-months maturity, as well as a second Covered Bond Purchase Programme. These measures complement the active implementation of the Securities Markets Programme which the Governing Council decided upon at the beginning of August in response to the intensification of the sovereign debt crisis. Apart from these non-standard measures, the Governing Council, however, also decided to leave the interest rate applied in our main refinancing operations unchanged. I would thus like to use the opportunity of delivering the closing speech to this conference, to reflect on our monetary policy objectives, the challenges posed by the on-going financial and economic crisis for monetary policy, as well as the different standard and non-standard measures we have adopted; and how they relate to each other. Price stabilityAs regards objectives for monetary policy, for the ECB there is one which trumps all others: price-stability. This is the primary objective which euro area governments have delegated to the ECB as an independent central bank, and which is enshrined in the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU. The achievement of price stability is thus what we are accountable for, before anything else. While the ECB is bound to the primary objective of price-stability, it was left to the ECB to define price stability. Since the start of the euro in 1999, we have defined price stability as a level of inflation of below but close to 2% over the medium-term. What we have achieved, from the first of January 1999 until the end of this September, is an average inflation rate of around 2.0%. Let me emphasise that this period includes the financial crisis which started in the summer of 2007, which has already entered its fifth year. Despite these challenging times, the record in delivering price-stability is outstanding and stronger than that of any of the national predecessors of the ECB. An average inflation rate of around 2.0% testifies as much to the success of the euro as a currency, as to the ECB as its central bank. The monetary policy transmission mechanismThe pursuit of price-stability requires an effective monetary policy transmission mechanism. When the monetary policy transmission mechanism functions, then decisions on the official interest rate, in the case of the ECB the minimum bid rate in main refinancing operations, appropriately affect inflation and economic activity through various channels, in line with the established standard empirical relationships. The starting point of the monetary policy transmission mechanism is the overnight interbank market. From there, interest rates are transmitted along the yield curve, also through the formation of expectations, to longer-term interest rates. Furthermore, banks and other financial market participants, pass on money market interest rates to households and businesses, thereby affecting economic activity. In what follows, let me focus on three market segments which, in the euro area, are particularly relevant for the monetary policy transmission mechanism. These segments have been specially important during the financial crisis and this is why our monetary policy measures have focused on them: first, the interbank market; second, the covered bond market; third the sovereign debt market.The interbank marketLet me start with the interbank market. In normal times, the Eurosystem calibrates the amount of central bank liquidity it provides to banks in its refinancing operations in order to meet the liquidity needs of the system as a whole. The aim of this calibration is to equalise the probability of banks being either short or long in central bank liquidity on the last day of the reserve maintenance period. If that is achieved, the price for central bank liquidity in the interbank market should lie half-way between the marginal lending and the deposit facility rate: in other words it should be similar to the MRO rate. Intertemporal arbitrage assures that also in previous days of the maintenance period, the overnight rate equals the MRO rate. A key pre-condition for interbank markets to work smoothly is, however, that banks lend to each other and that liquidity flows smoothly between market participants. Central bank liquidity provision is based on banks’ aggregate liquidity needs. If liquidity does not circulate, then the appropriate liquidity supply is very difficult to calibrate. More than that, if some banks’ access to the interbank market is impaired, these may have to pay very high rates. As a result money market rates may rise significantly above the MRO rate, thereby impairing the starting point of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. Covered bondsWell-functioning securities markets more generally play a crucial role in the monetary transmission mechanism. The second market I would like to discuss is the most important privately issued bond segment in euro area capital markets, namely covered bonds. Covered bonds represent a central funding source for euro area banks and, as you may know, in contrast to other currency areas, banks are the main source of credit in the euro area. As a result, conditions in the covered bond markets are an important determinant of banks’ ability to extend credit to their own customers. Sovereign bondsWith regard to the third market segment which I would like to discuss, sovereign bonds, we can distinguish at least three ways in which they affect monetary policy transmission. First, the price channel: As a ”risk-free rate”, sovereign bonds have traditionally served as a benchmark, indeed a floor, for the interest rates banks charged for loans, and for the pricing of other financial contracts and securities. Indeed, due to their supposed “risk-free” property, the holding of government bonds as liquid assets is generally rather encouraged by regulators. This is especially true also for the new liquidity risk regulation proposed as part of Basel III. Second, the balance sheet channel: changes in prices of government bonds affect the balance sheet value of securities held for trading, or for sale. Finally, there is the liquidity channel, through which government bonds have become the prime source of collateral in interbank lending. Other objectives?Beyond price-stability and the maintenance of the transmission mechanism, can the ECB pursue monetary policy objectives other than price-stability? While the Treaty of the EU establishes price stability as the primary and overriding objective of monetary policy, it also states that without prejudice to price stability, the ECB shall “support the general economic policies of the Community” and “act in accordance with the principle of an open market economy with free competition, favouring an efficient allocation of resources”. The Treaty also mentions that the ECB shall “contribute to the smooth conduct of policies pursued by the competent authorities relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions and the stability of the financial system ”At various points of the financial crisis, including the present juncture, financial stability has been at risk. What does this mean for the ECB in practice? As laid down by the Treaty, there is a lexicographic ordering of objectives: price stability comes first: if this is granted, then the ECB may contribute to financial stability. Therefore, there can be no question of trading off price stability against financial stability. Indeed, price stability is a necessary condition for financial stability and thus the best contribution monetary policy can make to financial stability. Note, however, that even with price-stability guaranteed, the ECB should only contribute to the smooth functioning of the financial system. Financial stability is a responsibility of governments, while our responsibility is price-stability. Indeed, if governments respond appropriately to risks to financial stability and banks reinforce and efficiently restructure their balance sheets, the ECB may have to be less concerned with non-standard measures to restore the monetary policy transmission mechanism.Against the background of our objectives of price-stability and the monetary policy transmission mechanism, let me now turn to the origins of the financial crisis.We can distinguish two major episodes in the current crisis, first the sub-prime crisis, magnified by the collapse of Lehman Brothers, and, second, the sovereign debt crisis in whose thrall we still find ourselves.Mispricing of riskThe two episodes share some common causes. During the so-called “great moderation” - growth was steady, inflation low, and the slicing, dicing and distributing of risk had supposedly made financial markets more efficient and resilient – but what had in fact occurred was that risk had been mispriced. The risk of sub-prime mortgages and the financial products built around them was grossly underestimated. The same occurred with sovereign bond markets, as only small differences in risk premia could be observed in the euro area, despite significantly diverging debt and deficit dynamics in the different member states. Subsequently, both in sub-prime and sovereign debt markets risks became over-priced with markets quickly becoming one-sided as a result of contagion and extreme risk aversion. Underlying the crisis is thus a significant fragility of security markets, which calls into question the efficiency of financial markets more generally.From the sub-prime to the sovereign debt crisisAt least three aspects of the sub-prime crisis contributed also to the current sovereign debt crisis. First, the sub-prime crisis weakened banks’ balance sheets, which were still under repair when the sovereign debt crisis came to a head in May 2010. Second, the fiscal support given to banking systems and significant spending packages worsened public debts and deficits. Third, the Lehman bankruptcy left confidence in the robustness of the financial system severely dented.The root cause of the current crisis, however, lies within the shores of the euro area. Nonetheless, with the internal and external value of the euro holding up well, this is certainly not a crisis of the euro but a sovereign debt crisis focused on some euro area sovereigns. Two things, however, have gone wrong: First, some countries have accumulated debts and deficits, which at a minimum make them vulnerable to self-fulfilling unsustainable dynamics. Second, the Stability and Growth Pact was effectively suspended when France and Germany escaped sanctions for breaching the debt and deficit criteria in 2003. More generally and at a deeper level, the governance of the economic union, which should complement the monetary union, has been insufficiently articulated since the outset of EMU. The standard tool: the official interest rateWhat has been the role of monetary policy in this context of economic and financial crisis? Let’s start by first looking at what is often referred to as conventional monetary policy. The standard and most important tool of monetary policy is the official interest rate, in the case of the Eurosystem the minimum bid rate in the weekly main refinancing operations. Although we characterise this tool as “standard”, the financial crisis did require significant and aggressive cuts in interest rates: following the collapse of Lehman Brothers the ECB lowered, within a period of seven months, the refinancing rate by 325 basis points from 4.25% to a historic low of 1%. The rate was kept at this historically low level until April 2011 when the Governing Council decided to increase the rate by 25 basis points. This was complemented by another rate increase to the current level of 1.5%, which the Governing Council decided to maintain at its last meeting of 6th October. The financial crisis has required the ECB to go beyond the standard interest rate policy. Let me now turn to the three market segments, I have mentioned earlier: the interbank market; the covered bond market and the sovereign debt market. Interbank marketThe sub-prime crisis made itself felt in interbank markets at the beginning of August 2007 when overnight rates started trading at unusually high spreads to the MRO rate. This reflected some banks’ perceived need to hedge against adverse liquidity risk. The collapse of Lehman then transformed the money market tensions into a full-blown crisis as a vicious circle of increased liquidity and credit risk brought interbank trading to a virtual halt. Money markets meanwhile became extremely segmented according to specific bank names: the uncertainty surrounding holdings and values of mortgage-related financial products shut specific counterparties out of the interbank market. In the sovereign crisis, segmentation is arguably an even more significant problem, as it occurs normally by jurisdiction. Banks generally exhibit home bias in their public debt holding: as a result, counterparties’ ability to trade cross-border in the interbank market becomes increasingly correlated with the perceived riskiness of their sovereign. In response to the segmentation of interbank markets, the ECB adopted several measures which essentially replace the missing intermediation in the interbank market by increasing intermediation through the central bank: first, the fixed-rate full allotment policy; second, LTROs with 6-month and 12-month maturity; third: foreign currency operations; fourth: a further broadening of the collateral framework. Let me take them in turn. While the money market tensions in August 2007 were addressed with a few fixed-rate full allotment tenders with overnight maturity, with effect from 15 October 2008, we introduced the fixed-rate full allotment policy in all our refinancing operations for the different maturities. Under fixed rate full allotment counterparties have their bids fully satisfied, against adequate collateral, and on the condition of financial soundness. The fixed rate full allotment policy has proven a very efficient way of offsetting liquidity risk in the market by ensuring banks’ continued access to liquidity. It is also a very flexible tool, as counterparties can themselves control the amount of liquidity they demand. Thus, a falling demand for liquidity can be seen as a sign of normalisation. The fixed-rate full allotment policy is probably the most significant non-standard measure the ECB is implementing. At its latest meeting on 6th October the Governing Council, in response to a worsening of liquidity tensions in the market, has committed to maintaining the fixed-rate full allotment policy until the middle of July 2012.The fixed-rate full allotment policy has been complemented by 6-month and 12-month operations. These operations serve to further reduce the funding risk faced by the banking system over a longer time horizon. They were an important tool following the Lehman collapse. Whilst in late 2009 it had been decided to phase them out, in August of this year the Governing Council decided to re-introduce such operations by conducting one 6-month operation and more recently to allot one operation of approximately 12-months and one of approximately 13-months which will reach the beginning of 2013.As a third element of our non-standard measures, the international cooperation of the major central banks has been crucial: especially the swap arrangements with the US Federal Reserve which have allowed us to conduct fixed-rate full allotment tenders in US dollars which are aimed at repairing impaired money markets in foreign currency. These operations have been instrumental following the collapse of Lehman, while during the course of 2010 demand in these operations petered out. As a precautionary measure, the ECB has nonetheless recently decided to re-establish 84-day fixed-rate full allotment tenders in US dollar, in addition to the 7-days tenders. Finally, our response to the crisis has included an extension of our eligible collateral list. The main aspects of the Eurosystem’s collateral framework are the following: that we accept a very broad range of eligible assets; that a broad range of counterparties can participate in our refinancing operations; that the same type of collateral is accepted in all refinancing operations; and that we have common eligibility criteria across the euro area, with loss-sharing in case of a counterparty default. Having a framework that already accepted a wide range of collateral before the crisis, which in the case of the euro area is due to the original need to accommodate a very diverse financial system, has served as a key crisis-mitigation tool. Especially important is the possibility to increase the liquidity of assets and counterparties in times of stress. It is worth noting that the financial crisis led other major central banks to significantly broaden the collateral framework for their open market operations. By contrast, the Eurosystem only had to make relatively minor adjustments to its collateral framework. Let me give you two examples: in October 2008, we started to accept some foreign-currency ABS against euro area collateral. Furthermore, credit thresholds on marketable assets (except ABS) were lowered from A- to BBB. A further response to the sovereign debt crisis relating to changes in our collateral framework has been to suspend the application of the minimum credit rating threshold for outstanding and new marketable debt instruments issued or guaranteed by the Greek, Irish and Portuguese governments, all of which are implementing EU and IMF programmes. It should be emphasised, however, that our collateral framework is flexible. As part of our traditionally conservative risk management approach, we have also tightened some requirements in the course of the crisis. For instance, the eligibility of foreign-currency ABS was revoked on the first of January of this year and ABS rating requirements have been tightened more generally. For example, we now require newly issued ABS to have at least two AAA ratings, when they are issued, in order to be eligible in our operations. Central bank intermediation as automatic stabiliserBoth our fixed-rate full allotment policy and our broad collateral framework have the properties of automatic stabilisers with regards to financial market turbulences. The term “Automatic stabiliser” is usually applied to features of tax and transfer systems which tend to offset fluctuations in economic activity without the need for discretionary fiscal interventions by policymakers. However, both our fixed-rate full allotment policy and our collateral framework smooth out the demand for liquidity in a similar automatic way. Consider fixed-rate full allotment against broad collateral: If demand is high, liquidity provision is high and within the bound of the standing facilities corridor, money market rates fall, reducing tensions. By contrast, if demand for liquidity declines, money market rates rise again towards the MRO rate and become less accommodative. In addition, if financial market tensions have a negative effect on certain market segments, like the covered bond and ABS markets, our collateral framework can help improve the liquidity conditions for these securities by accepting them as eligible collateral.Moving on from interbank markets let me now turn to the covered and sovereign bond markets.Covered Bond Purchase ProgrammeOne of the innovative responses of our operational framework was the launch of our first Covered Bond Purchase Programme (CBPP1) in July 2009. This initiative had four objectives: first, reducing money market term rates; second, easing funding conditions for credit institutions and enterprises; third, encouraging credit institutions to maintain or expand their lending to households and enterprises; and, fourth, improving market liquidity in important segments of private debt securities markets.The CBPP was announced in May 2009 and € 60 billion of covered bonds were purchased from July 2009 to July 2010. The programme was successful in restarting activity in primary covered bond markets. However, with the recent intensification of the sovereign debt crisis, covered bond markets have again come under significant pressure. At its meeting of 6th October, the Governing Council therefore decided to announce a second covered-bond purchase programme, CBPP2, within which €40 billion will be bought within the year starting November 2011. CBPP2 shares with CBPP1 the objective of easing funding conditions and encouraging institutions to maintain or expand lending, as well as supporting market liquidity in private debt security markets.Securities Markets ProgrammeThe fact that sovereign bond markets in some euro area jurisdictions were becoming increasingly dysfunctional by May 2010, and considerations over the crucial role that this segment plays as a basic pillar of our financial system, motivated the launch of one of our most important non-conventional monetary policies to date: the Securities Markets Programme (SMP). The main purpose of this programme is maintaining a functioning monetary policy transmission mechanism by promoting the functioning of certain key government and private bond segments. Impairment of the monetary policy transmission mechanism caused by tensions in government bond markets can be significant. This can happen, firstly, via the price channel, as the role of the “risk-free rate” as a pricing benchmark is distorted. Falling values of sovereign bond portfolios also affect banks’ balance sheets, and reduce, through the liquidity channel the value of government bonds as collateral. In addition to this, excessive volatility of bond prices can also force investors to sell-off their bond holdings and make it more difficult for market makers to do their job. All these channels affect banks’ and other participants’ ability to play their role in transmitting our interest rate policy because they negatively affect their intermediation role and can cause a contraction in the supply of credit.The SMP should, of course, be clearly distinguished from the policy of quantitative easing. While the objective of the SMP is to repair the transmission mechanism, quantitative easing aims at injecting additional central bank liquidity in order to stimulate the economy. As a result, quantitative easing, as for instance with the Bank of England, comes with precise quantitative targets. By contrast, the size of SMP purchases is driven by an intervention strategy which seeks to improve market functioning. Let me stress that the liquidity injected through SMP purchases is re-absorbed on a weekly basis so as to specifically neutralise the programme’s liquidity impact.It is important to note that with its contribution to the monetary policy transmission mechanism, the SMP, in conjunction with the SMP-liquidity absorbing operations, is oriented towards price-stability. Thus, the SMP is very much an innovative tool with an orthodox stability-oriented purpose. Standard and non-standard measures: complementary or independent of each other?How can we best characterise the relation between standard and non-standard measures? In terms of our decision-making we follow a separation principle. This means that there is no pre-determined sequence of standard and non-standard measures. For instance, in April 2011 the Governing Council raised the MRO rate before having phased-out all the non-standard measures. Similarly, at its most recent meeting the Governing Council decided to keep the main refinancing rate unchanged, while, firstly, expanding our non-standard measures by re-introducing LTROs with 12-months and now even 13-months maturity, and, secondly, announcing a second covered bond purchase programme. As the discussion of non-standard measures has shown, these measures are not, however, necessarily separate from the standard interest rate policy, but rather complement it. While the monetary stance is signalled through the  main refinancing rate, and non-standard measures are directed towards maintaining the  monetary policy transmission mechanism, standard and non-standard measures complement each other in the pursuit of price-stability , which is the mandate that our fellow European citizens entrusted us with in the EU Treaty. Let me briefly conclude by highlighting that the segmentation of interbank markets is a reflection of the segmentation of sovereign bond markets and of the debt crisis which afflicts some euro area jurisdictions. Our most significant non-standard measure is without doubt the fixed-rate full allotment policy, which provides central bank intermediation where the interbank market fails and which operates in a very quiet manner. Although this policy can moderate the symptoms of the crisis, it cannot provide the lasting solution to this crisis. This solution will require the decoupling of banks’ fortunes from the funding situation of their sovereign. In light of recent developments, swift recapitalisations of banks in a coordinated fashion will prove crucial. A lasting solution to the sovereign debt crisis must tackle its root causes. To this end, the affected countries must improve their fiscal adjustments and implement structural measures aimed at promoting growth. In addition to this, the euro area will also need to develop economic governance which is effective. More generally, governments also have to step up more decisively to preserve financial stability, which is their responsibility. If banks’, following appropriate policy actions on the above mentioned fronts, are no longer mistrusted because of their holdings of sovereign debt, the segmentation of money markets will decrease significantly. Then the need for adopting non-standard measures would disappear. And I would need to steal less of your time to discuss the monetary policy of the ECB. Time is certainly not something we have in plentiful supply, given the immense economic policy challenges that countries like ours have ahead of them on their way out of the crisis.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur discuss ecb monetari polici crisi wish could talk financi crisi past tens last time opportun talk issu malaga honour receiv titl doctor honori causa prestigi univers june unfortun sinc sovereign debt crisi reach new intens may know led govern council ecb recent meet th octob adopt addit monetari polici measur form commit continu fixedr full allot polici least middl allot two longterm refinanc oper approxim month matur well second cover bond purchas programm measur complement activ implement secur market programm govern council decid upon begin august respons intensif sovereign debt crisi apart nonstandard measur govern council howev also decid leav interest rate appli main refinanc oper unchang would thus like use opportun deliv close speech confer reflect monetari polici object challeng pose ongo financi econom crisi monetari polici well differ standard nonstandard measur adopt relat price stabilitya regard object monetari polici ecb one trump other pricest primari object euro area govern deleg ecb independ central bank enshrin treati function eu achiev price stabil thus account anyth els ecb bound primari object pricest left ecb defin price stabil sinc start euro defin price stabil level inflat close mediumterm achiev first januari end septemb averag inflat rate around let emphasis period includ financi crisi start summer alreadi enter fifth year despit challeng time record deliv pricest outstand stronger nation predecessor ecb averag inflat rate around testifi much success euro currenc ecb central bank monetari polici transmiss mechanismth pursuit pricest requir effect monetari polici transmiss mechan monetari polici transmiss mechan function decis offici interest rate case ecb minimum bid rate main refinanc oper appropri affect inflat econom activ various channel line establish standard empir relationship start point monetari polici transmiss mechan overnight interbank market interest rate transmit along yield curv also format expect longerterm interest rate furthermor bank financi market particip pass money market interest rate household busi therebi affect econom activ follow let focus three market segment euro area particular relev monetari polici transmiss mechan segment special import financi crisi monetari polici measur focus first interbank market second cover bond market third sovereign debt market interbank marketlet start interbank market normal time eurosystem calibr amount central bank liquid provid bank refinanc oper order meet liquid need system whole aim calibr equalis probabl bank either short long central bank liquid last day reserv mainten period achiev price central bank liquid interbank market lie halfway margin lend deposit facil rate word similar mro rate intertempor arbitrag assur also previous day mainten period overnight rate equal mro rate key precondit interbank market work smooth howev bank lend liquid flow smooth market particip central bank liquid provis base bank aggreg liquid need liquid circul appropri liquid suppli difficult calibr bank access interbank market impair may pay high rate result money market rate may rise signific mro rate therebi impair start point monetari polici transmiss mechan cover bondswellfunct secur market general play crucial role monetari transmiss mechan second market would like discuss import privat issu bond segment euro area capit market name cover bond cover bond repres central fund sourc euro area bank may know contrast currenc area bank main sourc credit euro area result condit cover bond market import determin bank abil extend credit custom sovereign bondswith regard third market segment would like discuss sovereign bond distinguish least three way affect monetari polici transmiss first price channel riskfre rate sovereign bond tradit serv benchmark inde floor interest rate bank charg loan price financi contract secur inde due suppos riskfre properti hold govern bond liquid asset general rather encourag regul especi true also new liquid risk regul propos part basel iii second balanc sheet channel chang price govern bond affect balanc sheet valu secur held trade sale final liquid channel govern bond becom prime sourc collater interbank lend object beyond pricest mainten transmiss mechan ecb pursu monetari polici object pricest treati eu establish price stabil primari overrid object monetari polici also state without prejudic price stabil ecb shall support general econom polici communiti act accord principl open market economi free competit favour effici alloc resourc treati also mention ecb shall contribut smooth conduct polici pursu compet author relat prudenti supervis credit institut stabil financi system various point financi crisi includ present junctur financi stabil risk mean ecb practic laid treati lexicograph order object price stabil come first grant ecb may contribut financi stabil therefor question trade price stabil financi stabil inde price stabil necessari condit financi stabil thus best contribut monetari polici make financi stabil note howev even pricest guarante ecb contribut smooth function financi system financi stabil respons govern respons pricest inde govern respond appropri risk financi stabil bank reinforc effici restructur balanc sheet ecb may less concern nonstandard measur restor monetari polici transmiss mechan background object pricest monetari polici transmiss mechan let turn origin financi crisi distinguish two major episod current crisi first subprim crisi magnifi collaps lehman brother second sovereign debt crisi whose thrall still find mispric riskth two episod share common caus socal great moder growth steadi inflat low slice dice distribut risk suppos made financi market effici resili fact occur risk mispric risk subprim mortgag financi product built around grossli underestim occur sovereign bond market small differ risk premia could observ euro area despit signific diverg debt deficit dynam differ member state subsequ subprim sovereign debt market risk becam overpr market quick becom onesid result contagion extrem risk avers under crisi thus signific fragil secur market call question effici financi market general subprim sovereign debt crisisat least three aspect subprim crisi contribut also current sovereign debt crisi first subprim crisi weaken bank balanc sheet still repair sovereign debt crisi came head may second fiscal support given bank system signific spend packag worsen public debt deficit third lehman bankruptci left confid robust financi system sever dent root caus current crisi howev lie within shore euro area nonetheless intern extern valu euro hold well certain crisi euro sovereign debt crisi focus euro area sovereign two thing howev gone wrong first countri accumul debt deficit minimum make vulner selffulfil unsustain dynam second stabil growth pact effect suspend franc germani escap sanction breach debt deficit criteria general deeper level govern econom union complement monetari union insuffici articul sinc outset emu standard tool offici interest ratewhat role monetari polici context econom financi crisi let start first look often refer convent monetari polici standard import tool monetari polici offici interest rate case eurosystem minimum bid rate week main refinanc oper although characteris tool standard financi crisi requir signific aggress cut interest rate follow collaps lehman brother ecb lower within period seven month refinanc rate basi point histor low rate kept histor low level april govern council decid increas rate basi point complement anoth rate increas current level govern council decid maintain last meet th octob financi crisi requir ecb go beyond standard interest rate polici let turn three market segment mention earlier interbank market cover bond market sovereign debt market interbank marketth subprim crisi made felt interbank market begin august overnight rate start trade unusu high spread mro rate reflect bank perceiv need hedg advers liquid risk collaps lehman transform money market tension fullblown crisi vicious circl increas liquid credit risk brought interbank trade virtual halt money market meanwhil becam extrem segment accord specif bank name uncertainti surround hold valu mortgagerel financi product shut specif counterparti interbank market sovereign crisi segment arguabl even signific problem occur normal jurisdict bank general exhibit home bias public debt hold result counterparti abil trade crossbord interbank market becom increas correl perceiv riski sovereign respons segment interbank market ecb adopt sever measur essenti replac miss intermedi interbank market increas intermedi central bank first fixedr full allot polici second ltros month month matur third foreign currenc oper fourth broaden collater framework let take turn money market tension august address fixedr full allot tender overnight matur effect octob introduc fixedr full allot polici refinanc oper differ matur fix rate full allot counterparti bid fulli satisfi adequ collater condit financi sound fix rate full allot polici proven effici way offset liquid risk market ensur bank continu access liquid also flexibl tool counterparti control amount liquid demand thus fall demand liquid seen sign normalis fixedr full allot polici probabl signific nonstandard measur ecb implement latest meet th octob govern council respons worsen liquid tension market commit maintain fixedr full allot polici middl juli fixedr full allot polici complement month month oper oper serv reduc fund risk face bank system longer time horizon import tool follow lehman collaps whilst late decid phase august year govern council decid reintroduc oper conduct one month oper recent allot one oper approxim month one approxim month reach begin third element nonstandard measur intern cooper major central bank crucial especi swap arrang us feder reserv allow us conduct fixedr full allot tender us dollar aim repair impair money market foreign currenc oper instrument follow collaps lehman cours demand oper peter precautionari measur ecb nonetheless recent decid reestablish day fixedr full allot tender us dollar addit day tender final respons crisi includ extens elig collater list main aspect eurosystem collater framework follow accept broad rang elig asset broad rang counterparti particip refinanc oper type collater accept refinanc oper common elig criteria across euro area lossshar case counterparti default framework alreadi accept wide rang collater crisi case euro area due origin need accommod divers financi system serv key crisismitig tool especi import possibl increas liquid asset counterparti time stress worth note financi crisi led major central bank signific broaden collater framework open market oper contrast eurosystem make relat minor adjust collater framework let give two exampl octob start accept foreigncurr ab euro area collater furthermor credit threshold market asset except ab lower bbb respons sovereign debt crisi relat chang collater framework suspend applic minimum credit rate threshold outstand new market debt instrument issu guarante greek irish portugues govern implement eu imf programm emphasis howev collater framework flexibl part tradit conserv risk manag approach also tighten requir cours crisi instanc elig foreigncurr ab revok first januari year ab rate requir tighten general exampl requir newli issu ab least two aaa rate issu order elig oper central bank intermedi automat stabiliserboth fixedr full allot polici broad collater framework properti automat stabilis regard financi market turbul term automat stabilis usual appli featur tax transfer system tend offset fluctuat econom activ without need discretionari fiscal intervent policymak howev fixedr full allot polici collater framework smooth demand liquid similar automat way consid fixedr full allot broad collater demand high liquid provis high within bound stand facil corridor money market rate fall reduc tension contrast demand liquid declin money market rate rise toward mro rate becom less accommod addit financi market tension negat effect certain market segment like cover bond ab market collater framework help improv liquid condit secur accept elig collater move interbank market let turn cover sovereign bond market cover bond purchas programmeon innov respons oper framework launch first cover bond purchas programm cbpp juli initi four object first reduc money market term rate second eas fund condit credit institut enterpris third encourag credit institut maintain expand lend household enterpris fourth improv market liquid import segment privat debt secur market cbpp announc may billion cover bond purchas juli juli programm success restart activ primari cover bond market howev recent intensif sovereign debt crisi cover bond market come signific pressur meet th octob govern council therefor decid announc second coveredbond purchas programm cbpp within billion bought within year start novemb cbpp share cbpp object eas fund condit encourag institut maintain expand lend well support market liquid privat debt secur market secur market programmeth fact sovereign bond market euro area jurisdict becom increas dysfunct may consider crucial role segment play basic pillar financi system motiv launch one import nonconvent monetari polici date secur market programm smp main purpos programm maintain function monetari polici transmiss mechan promot function certain key govern privat bond segment impair monetari polici transmiss mechan caus tension govern bond market signific happen first via price channel role riskfre rate price benchmark distort fall valu sovereign bond portfolio also affect bank balanc sheet reduc liquid channel valu govern bond collater addit excess volatil bond price also forc investor selloff bond hold make difficult market maker job channel affect bank particip abil play role transmit interest rate polici negat affect intermedi role caus contract suppli credit smp cours clear distinguish polici quantit eas object smp repair transmiss mechan quantit eas aim inject addit central bank liquid order stimul economi result quantit eas instanc bank england come precis quantit target contrast size smp purchas driven intervent strategi seek improv market function let stress liquid inject smp purchas reabsorb week basi specif neutralis programm liquid impact import note contribut monetari polici transmiss mechan smp conjunct smpliquid absorb oper orient toward pricest thus smp much innov tool orthodox stabilityori purpos standard nonstandard measur complementari independ best characteris relat standard nonstandard measur term decisionmak follow separ principl mean predetermin sequenc standard nonstandard measur instanc april govern council rais mro rate phasedout nonstandard measur similar recent meet govern council decid keep main refinanc rate unchang first expand nonstandard measur reintroduc ltros month even month matur second announc second cover bond purchas programm discuss nonstandard measur shown measur howev necessarili separ standard interest rate polici rather complement monetari stanc signal main refinanc rate nonstandard measur direct toward maintain monetari polici transmiss mechan standard nonstandard measur complement pursuit pricest mandat fellow european citizen entrust us eu treati let briefli conclud highlight segment interbank market reflect segment sovereign bond market debt crisi afflict euro area jurisdict signific nonstandard measur without doubt fixedr full allot polici provid central bank intermedi interbank market fail oper quiet manner although polici moder symptom crisi cannot provid last solut crisi solut requir decoupl bank fortun fund situat sovereign light recent develop swift recapitalis bank coordin fashion prove crucial last solut sovereign debt crisi must tackl root caus end affect countri must improv fiscal adjust implement structur measur aim promot growth addit euro area also need develop econom govern effect general govern also step decis preserv financi stabil respons bank follow appropri polici action mention front longer mistrust hold sovereign debt segment money market decreas signific need adopt nonstandard measur would disappear would need steal less time discuss monetari polici ecb time certain someth plenti suppli given immens econom polici challeng countri like ahead way crisi reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en