Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Making SEPA a reality – Involving the public sector in the Single Euro Payments Area,08-05-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,2099,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,First of all, let me thank Charlie McCreevy and the European Commission for organising this event, which brings together some of the key European decision-makers of the public and financial sectors. I am pleased that more than 200 representatives of the public sector have had the opportunity to gather here today to discuss the implications of the introduction of the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA). Five years ago the public sector, together with the banks, the retail industry, the European Central Bank (ECB) and the national central banks (NCBs), introduced the euro banknotes and coins. The cash changeover was a “concerted action” – a real joint effort – that proved to be very successful. Within weeks, citizens all over the euro area had switched to the new currency. From the “virtual” common currency of their bank accounts, the euro had become a tangible reality in their wallets and purses. For me, SEPA is not only the natural progression towards completing Monetary Union, it is a project that also requires a concerted action, just as the euro cash changeover did.SEPA is too important a project to leave it to the banks alone. Modern payment systems benefit everyone: business wants them and the customers will appreciate them. SEPA is part of a bigger project to integrate and modernise the financial sector. Thus, banks, central banks, the public sector and other stakeholders need to work together to make SEPA a reality. Moreover, the SEPA project also offers great opportunities for the public sector to make administrations more efficient and service-oriented. Let me be clear about the purpose of my speech: I am here not to lecture you about what the public sector “ought to do”. I want to speak about the great potential that SEPA entails for the public sector and the economy as a whole. In my view, SEPA is not about “compliance”; it’s about “opportunities”. In the conference today, many good initiatives of the public sector will be presented and I am looking forward to learning more about your planning towards SEPA. I will first elaborate briefly on the benefits of financial integration, especially in the payments field, before I explain the impact of SEPA on the efficiency and quality of public services. The integration of financial markets in Europe is of crucial importance for the ECB because of its impact on the development and efficiency of the financial system and its potential for stronger economic growth.Although substantial progress has been made in the integration of several market segments, the current fragmentation of retail payment infrastructures has so far prevented competition between service-providers of different regions in Europe. Fragmentation has also hampered the development of innovative solutions, especially in the field of cross-border payment services. For example, if you came to this conference today by car, you may have noticed that it is still difficult to pay with a foreign debit card at petrol stations here in Belgium. Moreover, it is not possible to initiate direct debits between euro area countries. The SEPA initiative will foster competition and innovation in the banking industry by removing the barriers that formerly protected national markets. SEPA will create a single set of rules, equal access conditions and equal treatment across the continent, so that banks will be able to offer efficient services in new markets. With SEPA, consumers, corporations and merchants will be able to compare their national products and services with those of a larger pool of providers. By doing so, SEPA will not only improve cross-border payments: SEPA will improve all payments, irrespective of their location.I expect that both banks and end-users will benefit from more efficient payment instruments and services, which are superior in terms to timeliness, cost and quality. Indeed, I expect that SEPA will reduce the costs, increase the convenience and automation and ensure the transparency of payments in euro. SEPA will also have a positive impact on the efficiency of the financial system and the economy as a whole. Let me now turn to the role of the public sector in SEPA. The public sector has a crucial role in actively fostering the competitiveness of the European economy and promoting the financial markets. The objectives of the public sector, as agreed by the EU Council in the Lisbon Agenda, are clear, and financial integration is one of the tools to help us to achieve the Lisbon objectives. This is the political context in which finance ministers declared their support for SEPA last year. [1] In addition, there is also an operational context, where public administrations are major initiators and receivers of payments.The public sector faces a key question today: should it regard SEPA simply as a “compliance issue”, i.e. new standards that have to be implemented, or should it take SEPA as a real opportunity to actively support the move towards a more efficient economy? I think there can be no doubt about the answer to this question. The public sector should play an active role in the integration and modernisation of the financial sector, together with the banking industry, suppliers and the other users of the financial system. Concerted action is therefore needed to bring forward innovation in the European economy.If we look at initiatives in the “e-governance” domain, we see that many public administrations are in the process of improving their administrative processes and their interaction with the citizens. Many public administrations have already started to make extensive use of new information and communication technologies that streamline the administration and increase the efficiency of the services offered to the public. Indeed, many public administrations are increasingly choosing to become innovators through their “e-governance” programmes.In Finland, for example, the e-government initiative has simplified the administration of the information from citizens and has made it easier for the administrations to monitor the processing of information. A project has been set up to integrate the information systems of different administrations, enabling citizens to access their information related to social welfare and health care, irrespective of their location in the country.You are probably familiar with the comparative ranking of public administrations which was made by the United Nations in its Global E-government Readiness Report [2]. It showed that many EU Member States are among the top ten countries that provide “e-government” services to the public. And several EU countries are also among the top ten countries ranked in the “e-participation” [3] index. This comparative ranking of “e-government” and “e-participation” shows that some administrations have become very advanced in terms of the services they offer. One could also imagine an additional ranking that includes “e-payments”. Such a ranking could list those public administrations that implement the SEPA payment schemes and initiate their payments electronically. Indeed, praise should be given to those public administrations that innovate their processing and increase the efficiency of their public spending. Many public administrations, however, also face some challenges when implementing major projects. These challenges relate to commitment, communication and coordination. Let me briefly explain these three challenges, which require concerted action from the public sector and the banking industry. An important challenge is related to the commitment made towards a project by the workforce of the organisation. Major reforms have to be supported by all the members of the organisation at both the managerial and technical levels. Concerning the “e-government” initiatives, for example, the public administrations agreed on the need to move towards an information society with improved services, and they have defined a strong business case to support it. Similarly, the changes related to SEPA should be built around a strong case for improving the administration’s services and its internal handling of payments. The public administrations, together with the banking industry and the central banks, could identify the possibilities of reducing manual interventions and by migrating to simplified handling of payments. The new SEPA schemes should be used to optimise the internal processing and could, for example, also include, at a later stage, e-invoicing and procurement.There are already first initiatives in this direction taken by some Member States. Let mention, as one interesting example, Italy, where central bank has joined forces with the banking association and the public administration to increase the automation of payment processes in Italy. A joint committee has been set up to coordinate the introduction of SEPA, which will contribute to the reform of the internal organisation of the administration related to payments. The public sector will not only introduce the SEPA standards, but will also pay part of the salaries from Italian public administrations through a single channel with simplified procedures. Another challenge is related to communication. Many public administrations are not familiar with the SEPA initiative and there is the lack of visibility of the available solutions. In our conference organised last November [4] with the banking industry, I concluded that the dialogue with the public administrations should be strengthened, and that public administrations should be more closely involved in the national implementation committees of SEPA. A communication strategy by the banking industry should be organised for specific audiences. The public administrations could also contact the banking industry or the national SEPA implementation committee.As a final remark, a particular challenge of public administrations is their decentralised nature, which complicates the coordination between local and independent administrations. In Finland, for example, the central administration has ensured horizontal coordination of the “e-governance” project by setting the overall vision and objectives for an information society under the responsibility of one member of cabinet. It has also ensured vertical coordination with local or regional administrations through the dissemination and exchange of information. For the implementation of SEPA, a strong and convincing overall vision has also to be prepared by the central administration, which should ensure horizontal and vertical coordination and implementation. The overall vision should be discussed with local levels of administration, so that they are convinced of the changes. The NCBs stand ready to assist the public administrations where needed in developing an inclusive approach.Let me close my address with my two main messages for the public sector. First, from my experience at the Austrian central bank and the ECB, I am convinced that public administrations should remain competitive in an increasingly integrated market, and that they have to become a truly modern, streamlined service-provider. SEPA is a tool for public administrations to improve their internal payment processes and provide efficient services to the citizens. The ECB is strongly committed to the SEPA project, and we will start initiating SEPA-compliant retail payments in January 2008. Currently we use different channels to initiate our payments, depending on whether they are intended for Germany or abroad. We will further streamline our internal processing so that, from January 2008, we are able to use only one channel for all our retail payments in euro, irrespective of the country of destination. Second, as with the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins, the implementation of SEPA also needs to be a concerted action to overcome the challenges associated with such a major project. The banking industry, ECOFIN, the European Parliament, and the Eurosystem have all showed their support for the implementation of SEPA. In the remaining eight months before the launch, it is important that public administrations also actively drive in the implementation process together with the citizens. I conclude that financial integration is crucial for Europe, as it continuously modernises the services offered and fosters competition. For some, financial integration is a slow process, but it is inevitable and it is an ongoing process. SEPA contributes to the larger project of integrating and modernising the financial sector, and thus to the objectives of the Lisbon Agenda. SEPA therefore deserves the commitment of us all. At the same time, SEPA enables us to meet the expectations of the public, in being a cost-conscious, innovative and forward-looking administration. So, not only for the sake of SEPA as a European project, but also for the sake of your own organisation and the citizens, it is important to make SEPA a reality.Thank you very much for your attention.[1] See Conclusions of the ECOFIN Council meeting on 10 October 2006, Luxembourg.[2] The UN Global E-government Readiness Report 2005 (www.unpan.org). The “E-government Readiness Index” includes four EU Member States: Denmark (#2), Sweden (#3), the United Kingdom (#4) and Finland (#9). The “E-participation Index” includes three EU Member States: the United Kingdom (#1), Denmark (#7) and the Netherlands (#10). [3] The “e-participation” makes it easier to discuss important issues via website portals, and enables citizens to become involved directly online in decision-making.[4] SEPA Summit, Euro Finance Week, 13-14 November 2006, Frankfurt am Main.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen first let thank charli mccreevi european commiss organis event bring togeth key european decisionmak public financi sector pleas repres public sector opportun gather today discuss implic introduct singl euro payment area sepa five year ago public sector togeth bank retail industri european central bank ecb nation central bank ncbs introduc euro banknot coin cash changeov concert action real joint effort prove success within week citizen euro area switch new currenc virtual common currenc bank account euro becom tangibl realiti wallet purs sepa natur progress toward complet monetari union project also requir concert action euro cash changeov sepa import project leav bank alon modern payment system benefit everyon busi want custom appreci sepa part bigger project integr modernis financi sector thus bank central bank public sector stakehold need work togeth make sepa realiti moreov sepa project also offer great opportun public sector make administr effici serviceori let clear purpos speech lectur public sector ought want speak great potenti sepa entail public sector economi whole view sepa complianc opportun confer today mani good initi public sector present look forward learn plan toward sepa first elabor briefli benefit financi integr especi payment field explain impact sepa effici qualiti public servic integr financi market europ crucial import ecb impact develop effici financi system potenti stronger econom growth although substanti progress made integr sever market segment current fragment retail payment infrastructur far prevent competit serviceprovid differ region europ fragment also hamper develop innov solut especi field crossbord payment servic exampl came confer today car may notic still difficult pay foreign debit card petrol station belgium moreov possibl initi direct debit euro area countri sepa initi foster competit innov bank industri remov barrier former protect nation market sepa creat singl set rule equal access condit equal treatment across contin bank abl offer effici servic new market sepa consum corpor merchant abl compar nation product servic larger pool provid sepa improv crossbord payment sepa improv payment irrespect locat expect bank endus benefit effici payment instrument servic superior term timeli cost qualiti inde expect sepa reduc cost increas conveni autom ensur transpar payment euro sepa also posit impact effici financi system economi whole let turn role public sector sepa public sector crucial role activ foster competit european economi promot financi market object public sector agre eu council lisbon agenda clear financi integr one tool help us achiev lisbon object polit context financ minist declar support sepa last year addit also oper context public administr major initi receiv payment public sector face key question today regard sepa simpli complianc issu e new standard implement take sepa real opportun activ support move toward effici economi think doubt answer question public sector play activ role integr modernis financi sector togeth bank industri supplier user financi system concert action therefor need bring forward innov european economi look initi egovern domain see mani public administr process improv administr process interact citizen mani public administr alreadi start make extens use new inform communic technolog streamlin administr increas effici servic offer public inde mani public administr increas choos becom innov egovern programm finland exampl egovern initi simplifi administr inform citizen made easier administr monitor process inform project set integr inform system differ administr enabl citizen access inform relat social welfar health care irrespect locat countri probabl familiar compar rank public administr made unit nation global egovern readi report show mani eu member state among top ten countri provid egovern servic public sever eu countri also among top ten countri rank eparticip index compar rank egovern eparticip show administr becom advanc term servic offer one could also imagin addit rank includ epay rank could list public administr implement sepa payment scheme initi payment electron inde prais given public administr innov process increas effici public spend mani public administr howev also face challeng implement major project challeng relat commit communic coordin let briefli explain three challeng requir concert action public sector bank industri import challeng relat commit made toward project workforc organis major reform support member organis manageri technic level concern egovern initi exampl public administr agre need move toward inform societi improv servic defin strong busi case support similar chang relat sepa built around strong case improv administr servic intern handl payment public administr togeth bank industri central bank could identifi possibl reduc manual intervent migrat simplifi handl payment new sepa scheme use optimis intern process could exampl also includ later stage einvoic procur alreadi first initi direct taken member state let mention one interest exampl itali central bank join forc bank associ public administr increas autom payment process itali joint committe set coordin introduct sepa contribut reform intern organis administr relat payment public sector introduc sepa standard also pay part salari italian public administr singl channel simplifi procedur anoth challeng relat communic mani public administr familiar sepa initi lack visibl avail solut confer organis last novemb bank industri conclud dialogu public administr strengthen public administr close involv nation implement committe sepa communic strategi bank industri organis specif audienc public administr could also contact bank industri nation sepa implement committe final remark particular challeng public administr decentralis natur complic coordin local independ administr finland exampl central administr ensur horizont coordin egovern project set overal vision object inform societi respons one member cabinet also ensur vertic coordin local region administr dissemin exchang inform implement sepa strong convinc overal vision also prepar central administr ensur horizont vertic coordin implement overal vision discuss local level administr convinc chang ncbs stand readi assist public administr need develop inclus approach let close address two main messag public sector first experi austrian central bank ecb convinc public administr remain competit increas integr market becom truli modern streamlin serviceprovid sepa tool public administr improv intern payment process provid effici servic citizen ecb strong commit sepa project start initi sepacompli retail payment januari current use differ channel initi payment depend whether intend germani abroad streamlin intern process januari abl use one channel retail payment euro irrespect countri destin second introduct euro banknot coin implement sepa also need concert action overcom challeng associ major project bank industri ecofin european parliament eurosystem show support implement sepa remain eight month launch import public administr also activ drive implement process togeth citizen conclud financi integr crucial europ continu modernis servic offer foster competit financi integr slow process inevit ongo process sepa contribut larger project integr modernis financi sector thus object lisbon agenda sepa therefor deserv commit us time sepa enabl us meet expect public costconsci innov forwardlook administr sake sepa european project also sake organis citizen import make sepa realiti thank much attent see conclus ecofin council meet octob luxembourg un global egovern readi report www unpan org egovern readi index includ four eu member state denmark sweden unit kingdom finland eparticip index includ three eu member state unit kingdom denmark netherland eparticip make easier discuss import issu via websit portal enabl citizen becom involv direct onlin decisionmak sepa summit euro financ week novemb frankfurt main reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en