Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Speech at the EPC Coordination Committee offsite meeting in Château-de-Limelette,03-09-2008,European Central Bank,ECB,2859,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,It is a great pleasure to participate in the EPC’s offsite meeting. I remember the first time I met you all four years ago. I was impressed by the vision demonstrated by you all and I was enthused by the huge task ahead.Today, we still have this vision and I would urge you now to complete the task. Not going on means falling back, which means risking losing what has already been achieved, letting others reap the benefits of the Single Market.When China participated in the Olympics for the first time, which was in 1932 in Los Angeles, then still the “Republic of China”, the team was small; it was made up of a single athlete. When the “Peoples’ Republic of China” participated for the first time in the Summer Olympics, once again in Los Angeles, but this time in 1984, they won 15 gold medals and finished fourth in the medal ranking.When China accepted to host the Olympics in 2008, it was with the clear intention of winning more medals than any other nation – and it did win more medals than any of the other teams that had been successful for decades.Are we ready for the Olympics with our SEPA project? Do we pursue our vision with the necessary zeal? The first results of intense training are visible – the SEPA credit transfer scheme has taken off; 1% of transfers five months after the start is not the critical mass required yet, but new facilities for merchants and corporates are on the way.The SEPA direct debit scheme – clearly the member in the team with a serious handicap. One hurdle – the Payments Services Directive (PSD) – has been overcome. For the first time, a consistent legal framework will be applied in each country. The second hurdle – the questions surrounding the multilateral balancing payment (MBP) — will have to be overcome as soon as possible. If no solution were to be found, the momentum might be lost and the system could fall to pieces again, with all the negative consequences for all those involved. Not to mention the third hurdle – today’s cards’ business. There we are at a crossroads as well. Either diversity should be preserved or lack of competition could lead to high fees for customers.Let me focus on three issues today: Direct debit scheme;End-date for migration; andCommunication.So, which are the main problems that the SEPA coaches still face today with regard to the SEPA direct debit scheme? One is a legal issue. How can we ensure that there are no problems in the migration from the existing mandates to the new SEPA direct debit mandates? For creditors, it would be a great burden if customers had to sign new mandates when switching from the national direct debit schemes to the SEPA direct debit scheme. Some countries have already found answers to this problem; other countries are still looking for a pragmatic solution. If it were to become necessary to make amendments to national legislation, the transposition of the PSD into national law would provide a good opportunity to kill two birds with one stone. National legislators should not miss this opportunity to help the payments business to become more efficient, innovative and truly European. Communication needs to be stepped up. This is particularly valid for the SEPA direct debit scheme. Direct debit users are reluctant. They have heard rumours and are afraid that it will not meet their needs. It is not safe, it is too safe, it is not modern, it is too modern, it is too different or more expensive than previous procedures; a lot of opinions were voiced before the product was even visible. Perhaps, the coaches were too busy defining the training schedule and therefore did not have sufficient time to train the athletes? All users should be made aware that their special needs can be met by means of individual offers from their banks, by transparent additional optional services that are offered by groups of banks or by additional services that can be offered at the level of whole banking communities.You will have noticed that I stressed the word “transparent” in connection with additional optional services. Transparency is crucial, because we do not want to see fragmentation re-introduced through the back door by additional optional services, the main aim of which is to protect markets and hamper competition. Users are also concerned about the prices. If we want the users to embrace the SEPA direct debit scheme, it is clear that prices for these services to end-users should not go up. Otherwise, we will face a tough challenge “selling” SEPA to the wider public. You may also be aware that EU Regulation 2560 — the so-called price regulation which was enacted in 2001 — is currently up for review. Regulation 2560 applies to the customer-to-bank domain. It is the clear intention to broaden the scope of Regulation 2560 from credit transfers and card payments to include direct debits. So, at the end of this review process, banks will very likely face a situation where the prices for cross-border direct debits will not be allowed to be higher than the prices for national direct debits. This may have an additional dampening effect on prices. In any case, an increase in national prices, as a result of the review, would clearly be against the spirit of the review and severely affect banks’ reputation and credibility in the eyes of their customers.Costs and prices are not only a matter of concern in the customer-to-bank domain, but in the bank-to-bank domain too. The multilateral balancing payment (MBP) — or “multilateral interchange fee” as I prefer to call it, because that is what it essentially is — has proven to be a thorny issue. Today’s practice regarding multilateral interchange fees (or “MIFs”) for national direct debits varies across countries. So, what should be done for the SEPA direct debit scheme?A European solution has to be found by the banks which is also agreeable to the European competition authority. But SEPA direct debits have to be rolled out in a little more than one year from now. This will hardly be enough time to find a comprehensive solution that meets all needs and answers all concerns. We face a situation where bankers run the risk of not being able to deliver the direct debits by November 2009. This is not acceptable, because SEPA direct debits are a vital piece in the SEPA puzzle. It would threaten the very existence of a Single Euro Payments Area, run counter to the goals of the Lisbon agenda, reverse all the work and efforts invested in this project, and throw the payments sector back into the “dark ages” of fragmentation along national borders. I would therefore like to test an idea with you. As I said before, we need a European solution, but we won’t have it ready in one year’s time. Defining and implementing this solution would probably take some more time. Coming back to the world of the Olympics, it would neither be a sprint of 100 metres, but certainly no marathon either, perhaps the best analogy is a 400-metre run, one circuit in the stadium. What does the runner have to take into account before he or she starts the circuit? I understand that there may no longer be any future for a general, transaction-based MIF. Neither for the current national direct debits nor for the upcoming SEPA direct debits.Against this background, I would like to make a suggestion. A suggestion which respects the views of the competition authorities, but also takes into consideration three further aspects: First, the importance of getting the SEPA direct debit scheme launched by November 2009, second, the need to create a level playing-field between the national and the SEPA direct debit scheme in the short to medium term, and third the time banks still need to develop a possible new compensation model. What we therefore need is an interim solution. This interim solution should be pragmatic and should be acceptable for a limited period of time to make the SEPA direct debit scheme fly. The objective of this interim solution is to have, right from the start, at the very least, a level playing-field in place for the SEPA direct debit scheme compared with the national, legacy direct debit schemes. Of course, the ultimate aim continues to be the total replacement of any national legacy direct debit scheme with the SEPA direct debit scheme. What is my suggestion for an interim period as from November 2009? There are currently no MIFs for cross-border direct debits, simply because direct debits are currently not executed on a cross-border basis. Directly after the roll-out, we expect that only very few cross-border SEPA direct debits will be carried out. We believe that allowing a properly justified MIF for cross-border SEPA direct debits during an interim phase would help to make SEPA ultimately successful. But what should happen with transactions at the national level carried out by either the old legacy direct debit schemes or the new SEPA direct debit scheme? During the interim phase, the existing legacy MIFs could remain in place and be applied to both legacy direct debits and SEPA direct debits carried out at the national level. As such, any changes to the legacy MIF should be applicable to the SEPA direct debit scheme too. This would ensure the necessary level playing-field in the national context for the SEPA direct debit scheme and the national legacy direct debit schemes that I mentioned before. Given that most direct debits will initially still be conducted at the national level, the vast majority of direct debits would thus be treated in the same manner. Customers, in particular creditors, would not need to be afraid of prices increasing. Banks would not see their business model change. I would like to reiterate that this is only a temporary solution, for I understand that at the end of the interim period, there would no longer be any transaction-based MIF, neither at the national level nor at the cross-border level, neither for SEPA direct debits nor for legacy direct debits, which would anyway have to be phased out. However, nothing prevents banks from devising other forms of compensation for the future. There are different models conceivable, or already in use, in order to cover costs and to provide incentives for those involved to offer and to use direct debits. If this compensation is based on a proper calculation and methodology, it should also be acceptable to competition authorities. Both sides are important here, demand and supply, banks should not only want to offer SEPA direct debits, but customers should also want to use them. What is also crucial for SEPA to be ultimately successful is to have a firm plan after when the SEPA instruments would replace the national payment instruments. All studies carried out on this subject in the past showed the same result: It is inefficient, it is costly, and it will not generate economies of scale, if two schemes continue to run in parallel for a long period of time. In short, it will prevent stakeholders from fully reaping the benefits of SEPA. Let me be clear on this: The national payment instruments will have to be phased out at some point in time if we are really serious about creating a Single Euro Payments Area. Maintaining national instruments means maintaining fragmentation. Right now, with SEPA credit transfers already up and running, a migration end-date should be defined soon. There is no rationale for keeping national and SEPA credit transfers running in parallel for an indefinite period of time. For the SEPA direct debit scheme, we are investigating whether it would be more useful to wait until they are rolled out so that stakeholders are able to gain some practical experience first. At the recent stakeholders’ forum on direct debits, some misunderstandings and reservations were already addressed. However, it still remains to be seen whether the end-date for SEPA direct debit scheme should be set now or later. The best way to set an end-date is still open for debate. In our view, there are various options available. One would be self-regulation; another would be regulation by the legislators. Regardless of who takes the initiative, regulation could be done directly by determining a date for abolishing the use of national schemes, or, indirectly, for example, by mandating the use of IBAN or the respective ISO standard. As I said before, this debate is still ongoing and I would in fact be happy to receive your feedback on what you consider to be the best end-date and the way to achieve this. We believe that some users are still uneasy about switching to SEPA because they do not know enough about SEPA and its advantages. Users need to know more about SEPA, the SEPA instruments, or the different possibilities that exist to add features to core schemes so that they fulfil specific needs. In short, users need more effective communication; SEPA needs to be “sold” to the users. First of all, there is a need for continuous and increased efforts to explain the changes and advantages which SEPA will bring to the different end-users. A second way to sell SEPA better is to offer attractive SEPA products and services. SEPA should be user-friendly for customers, whether they are large corporates, merchants, consumers or SMEs. When it comes to SEPA-readiness, there might be a gap between being “technically ready” to send and receive SEPA payments and offering marketable, user-friendly SEPA products and services. For example, BBAN-to-IBAN conversion facilities, the use of IBAN only, easy-to-use internet banking applications are simple, but also very effective examples of these “must have” services and products.People have a natural inclination to cling on to things they know and like. Why fix something if it is not broken? Here, the onus is mainly on you, the banks, to provide more information to your customers and to convince them with concrete, marketable, and high-quality offers. You have the direct contact and you are best placed to inform them. Naturally, public authorities have to play a role in disseminating information and we will continue to do so. But what is crucial, at this point in time, is more effective communication about SEPA from the banks to the user level. In my opinion, communication is a core task for the EPC; not to take over national responsibilities, but to support the national communication efforts with clear messages for the different target groups.Let me also say a few words about cash. The ECB welcomes the continuous dialogue between the ESCB Banknote Committee and the EPC Cash Working Group and – more specifically — the cooperative spirit of the discussions. Work is progressing regarding the implementation of the “Roadmap for more convergence of NCB cash services” and the development of the second series of euro banknotes is on its way.The European Commission has set up a special working group consisting of – inter alia – the EPC, Eurosystem representatives and the Commission to tackle the issue of cross-border transport of cash on the road. No Single Euro Cash Area will exist without having solved this issue.Furthermore, we took note that the EPC raised strong concerns regarding the Commission’s proposal to amend Regulation 1338 dated 2001. This regulation deals with measures necessary for the protection of the euro against counterfeiting. Certain concerns on the part of the EPC are in line with the concerns raised by the ECB in its formal opinion and I would like to ask the Commission to take a careful look at the matter.Today, I have mentioned a number of issues that are vital in order to make SEPA a success. All this can only be achieved – and I would really like to underline this – if the EPC continues to fulfil its role as the banks’ governing body in charge of payment issues. A strong coach and diligent training are crucial for any athlete’s success.What the EPC has achieved so far should not be the end of the story. The SEPA schemes are in place or ready to be put in place. But SEPA needs to develop further. Further improvements to the Rulebooks are under way, which will help to make the core schemes even more attractive. Another road to pursue is the development of innovative services, which will pave the way for a highly efficient euro payments business in the future. For example, we expect pan-European priority payments and e and m-payment solutions to be delivered, and let us not forget about e-invoicing. To come back to the Chinese and Olympic imagery: following the fireworks at the opening ceremony we are on the long march, we all feel the pains of marching on the plains. But I am convinced that SEPA will be a success. The example of China and the Olympics might help you to understand the final objective: making Europe more competitive and more innovative. By doing so, 100 medals for Europe will only be the beginning.Thank you very much for your attention. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur particip epc offsit meet rememb first time met four year ago impress vision demonstr enthus huge task ahead today still vision would urg complet task go mean fall back mean risk lose alreadi achiev let other reap benefit singl market china particip olymp first time los angel still republ china team small made singl athlet peopl republ china particip first time summer olymp los angel time won gold medal finish fourth medal rank china accept host olymp clear intent win medal nation win medal team success decad readi olymp sepa project pursu vision necessari zeal first result intens train visibl sepa credit transfer scheme taken transfer five month start critic mass requir yet new facil merchant corpor way sepa direct debit scheme clear member team serious handicap one hurdl payment servic direct psd overcom first time consist legal framework appli countri second hurdl question surround multilater balanc payment mbp overcom soon possibl solut found momentum might lost system could fall piec negat consequ involv mention third hurdl today card busi crossroad well either divers preserv lack competit could lead high fee custom let focus three issu today direct debit scheme enddat migrat andcommun main problem sepa coach still face today regard sepa direct debit scheme one legal issu ensur problem migrat exist mandat new sepa direct debit mandat creditor would great burden custom sign new mandat switch nation direct debit scheme sepa direct debit scheme countri alreadi found answer problem countri still look pragmat solut becom necessari make amend nation legisl transposit psd nation law would provid good opportun kill two bird one stone nation legisl miss opportun help payment busi becom effici innov truli european communic need step particular valid sepa direct debit scheme direct debit user reluct heard rumour afraid meet need safe safe modern modern differ expens previous procedur lot opinion voic product even visibl perhap coach busi defin train schedul therefor suffici time train athlet user made awar special need met mean individu offer bank transpar addit option servic offer group bank addit servic offer level whole bank communiti notic stress word transpar connect addit option servic transpar crucial want see fragment reintroduc back door addit option servic main aim protect market hamper competit user also concern price want user embrac sepa direct debit scheme clear price servic endus go otherwis face tough challeng sell sepa wider public may also awar eu regul socal price regul enact current review regul appli customertobank domain clear intent broaden scope regul credit transfer card payment includ direct debit end review process bank like face situat price crossbord direct debit allow higher price nation direct debit may addit dampen effect price case increas nation price result review would clear spirit review sever affect bank reput credibl eye custom cost price matter concern customertobank domain banktobank domain multilater balanc payment mbp multilater interchang fee prefer call essenti proven thorni issu today practic regard multilater interchang fee mif nation direct debit vari across countri done sepa direct debit scheme european solut found bank also agreeabl european competit author sepa direct debit roll littl one year hard enough time find comprehens solut meet need answer concern face situat banker run risk abl deliv direct debit novemb accept sepa direct debit vital piec sepa puzzl would threaten exist singl euro payment area run counter goal lisbon agenda revers work effort invest project throw payment sector back dark age fragment along nation border would therefor like test idea said need european solut won readi one year time defin implement solut would probabl take time come back world olymp would neither sprint metr certain marathon either perhap best analog metr run one circuit stadium runner take account start circuit understand may longer futur general transactionbas mif neither current nation direct debit upcom sepa direct debit background would like make suggest suggest respect view competit author also take consider three aspect first import get sepa direct debit scheme launch novemb second need creat level playingfield nation sepa direct debit scheme short medium term third time bank still need develop possibl new compens model therefor need interim solut interim solut pragmat accept limit period time make sepa direct debit scheme fli object interim solut right start least level playingfield place sepa direct debit scheme compar nation legaci direct debit scheme cours ultim aim continu total replac nation legaci direct debit scheme sepa direct debit scheme suggest interim period novemb current mif crossbord direct debit simpli direct debit current execut crossbord basi direct rollout expect crossbord sepa direct debit carri believ allow proper justifi mif crossbord sepa direct debit interim phase would help make sepa ultim success happen transact nation level carri either old legaci direct debit scheme new sepa direct debit scheme interim phase exist legaci mif could remain place appli legaci direct debit sepa direct debit carri nation level chang legaci mif applic sepa direct debit scheme would ensur necessari level playingfield nation context sepa direct debit scheme nation legaci direct debit scheme mention given direct debit initi still conduct nation level vast major direct debit would thus treat manner custom particular creditor would need afraid price increas bank would see busi model chang would like reiter temporari solut understand end interim period would longer transactionbas mif neither nation level crossbord level neither sepa direct debit legaci direct debit would anyway phase howev noth prevent bank devis form compens futur differ model conceiv alreadi use order cover cost provid incent involv offer use direct debit compens base proper calcul methodolog also accept competit author side import demand suppli bank want offer sepa direct debit custom also want use also crucial sepa ultim success firm plan sepa instrument would replac nation payment instrument studi carri subject past show result ineffici cost generat economi scale two scheme continu run parallel long period time short prevent stakehold fulli reap benefit sepa let clear nation payment instrument phase point time realli serious creat singl euro payment area maintain nation instrument mean maintain fragment right sepa credit transfer alreadi run migrat enddat defin soon rational keep nation sepa credit transfer run parallel indefinit period time sepa direct debit scheme investig whether would use wait roll stakehold abl gain practic experi first recent stakehold forum direct debit misunderstand reserv alreadi address howev still remain seen whether enddat sepa direct debit scheme set later best way set enddat still open debat view various option avail one would selfregul anoth would regul legisl regardless take initi regul could done direct determin date abolish use nation scheme indirect exampl mandat use iban respect iso standard said debat still ongo would fact happi receiv feedback consid best enddat way achiev believ user still uneasi switch sepa know enough sepa advantag user need know sepa sepa instrument differ possibl exist add featur core scheme fulfil specif need short user need effect communic sepa need sold user first need continu increas effort explain chang advantag sepa bring differ endus second way sell sepa better offer attract sepa product servic sepa userfriend custom whether larg corpor merchant consum smes come separeadi might gap technic readi send receiv sepa payment offer market userfriend sepa product servic exampl bbantoiban convers facil use iban easytous internet bank applic simpl also effect exampl must servic product peopl natur inclin cling thing know like fix someth broken onus main bank provid inform custom convinc concret market highqual offer direct contact best place inform natur public author play role dissemin inform continu crucial point time effect communic sepa bank user level opinion communic core task epc take nation respons support nation communic effort clear messag differ target group let also say word cash ecb welcom continu dialogu escb banknot committe epc cash work group specif cooper spirit discuss work progress regard implement roadmap converg ncb cash servic develop second seri euro banknot way european commiss set special work group consist inter alia epc eurosystem repres commiss tackl issu crossbord transport cash road singl euro cash area exist without solv issu furthermor took note epc rais strong concern regard commiss propos amend regul date regul deal measur necessari protect euro counterfeit certain concern part epc line concern rais ecb formal opinion would like ask commiss take care look matter today mention number issu vital order make sepa success achiev would realli like underlin epc continu fulfil role bank govern bodi charg payment issu strong coach dilig train crucial athlet success epc achiev far end stori sepa scheme place readi put place sepa need develop improv rulebook way help make core scheme even attract anoth road pursu develop innov servic pave way high effici euro payment busi futur exampl expect paneuropean prioriti payment e mpayment solut deliv let us forget einvoic come back chines olymp imageri follow firework open ceremoni long march feel pain march plain convinc sepa success exampl china olymp might help understand final object make europ competit innov medal europ begin thank much attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en