Vítor Constâncio: 2012 Bernácer prize award ceremony in honour of Nicholas Bloom,24-09-2013,European Central Bank,ECB,1618,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,It is a pleasure for me to be part of this session to award the 2012 Germán Bernácer Prize to Nicholas Bloom, Professor of Economics at Stanford University. Nicholas Bloom has made influential contributions to the academic debate in two broad areas, both of which are of great relevance for central bank policy-makers. First, his research on the effects of policy and economic uncertainty on business cycles helped us understand better some of the key contributing factors to the protracted slump in output during what has become known as the Great Recession. Second, his research on the determinants of good management practices at the firm level provided important insights on how to support long-term economic growth and competitiveness, including in the European context.The financial and economic crisis that started in the summer of 2007 brought about unprecedented challenges for central bank policy-makers. Some well-accepted paradigms and widely used models have come to be questioned. It is thus an important responsibility of a central bank to ensure that relevant new insights from academic research find their way into the actual conduct of monetary policy. The Eurosystem attempts to cope with this responsibility by fostering a constant intellectual exchange with the research community. The ECB organises many seminars, conferences and workshops where the most recent research findings can be discussed, and invites leading scholars to visit and conduct research in the ECB, for example by means of the Wim Duisenberg Fellowship. Moreover, the ECB supports promising young researchers by funding five Lamfalussy Fellowships each year. The aim is to promote policy-relevant research that meets the highest academic standards. The ECB also leads and co-ordinates research efforts through Eurosystem research networks to obtain research output which is necessary for ECB decision-making but which is as of yet unavailable at universities or other research institutes. I will come back to activities of one such research network at the end of my remarks. Research by Nicholas Bloom analysing the effects of uncertainty shocks on the economy is a prime example of a policy-relevant research output. Published in Econometrica in 2009, it could not be more timely. [1] The unprecedented level of uncertainty has been one of the key distinguishing features of the Great Recession. Economic uncertainty refers to an environment in which little or nothing is known about the future state of the economy. There is a variety of sources of economic uncertainty, ranging from wars, acts of terrorism and natural disasters to changes in economic and financial policies. Professor Bloom highlighted the adverse effects of heightened uncertainty on economic activity. Uncertainty leads firms to cut back or defer hiring and investment decisions. It also drives consumers to put off buying new goods. As a result, uncertainty can escalate financial stress and recession, as well as stall labour market recovery. [2] What was new was the attempt to measure general and event uncertainty through a variety of indicators, avoid the trap of reverse causation with the economic fluctuations it was trying to explain and insert the variable in a DSGE model.Professor Bloom’s work on uncertainty inspired further research on the effects of uncertainty, including on the links between uncertainty and monetary policy. [3] For example, the idea that changes in uncertainty may interact with monetary conditions and can drive global financial cycles was one of the themes in this year’s Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium, the annual gathering of prominent central bankers, finance ministers, leading academics and financial market players from around the world. [4]Because of its latent nature, uncertainty is difficult to quantify and has to be measured indirectly using a variety of indicators. Here, too, Nicholas Bloom, together with Scott Baker of Stanford University and Steven Davis of the University of Chicago, made an important contribution in developing an economic policy uncertainty index for the US, Europe and other major economies. The measure has been used not only in academic papers but also by investors and financial professionals . [5] It has also been subject to intense discussions in the blogosphere in view of some of its political uses. The difficulties in finding good indicators controlled to avoid reverse causation and the use of political events provided fodder for the debates. Professor Bloom’s work on measuring uncertainty stimulated more systematic analysis of uncertainty indices also at the ECB. We developed our own composite uncertainty indicator which combines four components: systemic stress, uncertainty of private households and firms, political uncertainty and financial risk aversion. Measurement difficulties were also an issue Professor Bloom had to tackle in the second strand of his research, namely in his research on the role of management practices in driving productivity and growth differentials across companies and across countries. Due to an absence of good quality data on management practices, little prior research was conducted on this important topic. To address this gap in the literature, Nicholas Bloom, together with John Van Reenen of the London School of Economics, developed a methodology for quantifying management practices. They carried out a large research project which used a new survey approach to measure management practices in a systematic way in more than 4,000 manufacturing firms across Europe, the US and Asia. The aspects of management practices their approach focuses on are systematic performance monitoring, setting appropriate targets, and providing incentives for good performance. They showed that firms with better management practices are larger, more productive, grow faster, and have higher survival rates. A conservative estimate indicates that differences in management practices account for a significant proportion (10-30%) of the differences in productivity between firms and between countries. [6] Their research did not stop at documenting the impact of the differences in management practices. They also offered suggestions for policy interventions that could encourage the uptake of good management behaviour. Competitive and flexible markets enable managers to re-optimise resources within and outside the firm more easily. . Educational standards matter as well. Better-managed firms have better educated workers and they use them more efficiently. Moreover, better educated managers have necessary skills to adopt state-of-the-art management practices and adapt to changing environment. This enables them to maintain and improve their global competitive position. Multinational companies also have a strong positive effect, as they transplant their management styles to the countries in which they operate. [7] These research-based conclusions highlight a key role of structural reforms in the wake of the global economic crisis. Countries with more competitive market conditions, better education and more investment in R&D and innovation policies can maximise the beneficial impact of managerial capital on productivity and growth. From the policy perspective, competitiveness issues have been identified as one of the root causes of the economic crisis in Europe and have therefore been explicitly included in the surveillance processes established at EU/euro area and G20 level. To further advance research in this area, the Eurosystem established the Competitiveness Research Network (CompNet) at the end of 2011. The network’s objective is to develop a more consistent analytical framework for assessing competitiveness, one which allows for a better correspondence between determinants and outcomes. To do so, the network functions as a unique forum in which different approaches and measures of competitiveness can be discussed, researched and developed, and eventually reconciled. Developing a framework which includes a complementary use of micro and macro data can lead to improved analyses of competitiveness issues. [8] I am confident that Nicholas Bloom will continue making extraordinary contributions to this and other research areas in the coming years. I herewith extend my sincerest congratulations to you – Nicholas – for winning the 2012 Bernácer Prize. [9][1]Nicholas Bloom, 2009, “The impact of uncertainty shocks,” Econometrica 77(3), pp. 623-685.[2]See Nicholas Bloom, 2011, “The uncertainty shock from the debt disaster will cause a double-dip recession”, VoxEU.org, 22 August; and Scott Baker, Nicholas Bloom and Steven J. Davis, 2012, “The Rocky Balboa recovery”, VoxEU.org, 20 June.[3]There is a vast body of literature that builds on Nicholas Bloom’s uncertainty research. I will only name a few papers which involved ECB researchers. Using German data, Popescu and Smets find that uncertainty shocks are less important drivers of business cycles compared to financial risk aversion shocks; see Adina Popescu and Frank Smets, 2009, “Uncertainty, risk-taking and the business cycle in Germany,” CESifo Economic Studies 56(4), 596-626. Bekaert et al. document that a lax monetary policy in the US decreases both risk aversion and uncertainty, with the former effect being stronger; see Geert Bekaert, Marie Hoerova and Marco Lo Duca, 2013, “Risk, Uncertainty and Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(7). [4]See Hélène Rey, 2013, “Dilemma not trilemma: The global financial cycle and monetary policy independence,” paper presented at the Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium. Incidentally, Hélène Rey was the 2006 Germán Bernácer Prize winner.[5]For more details on the construction of the measure see Scott Baker, Nicholas Bloom and Steven J. Davis, 2012, “Measuring economic policy uncertainty”, working paper, Stanford University.[6]See Nicholas Bloom and John Van Reenen, 2007, “Measuring and explaining management practices across firms and countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), pp. 1341–1408; and Nicholas Bloom and John Van Reenen, 2010, “Why do management practices differ across firms and countries?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(1), pp. 203-224. [7]In a recent contribution, Nicholas Bloom and co-authors showed that US multinationals obtained higher productivity from IT than non-US multinationals and that establishments taken over by US multinationals (but not by non-US multinationals) increased the productivity of their IT. They attributed a bulk of productivity differences to differing people management practices across US and non-US firms. See Nicholas Bloom, Raffaella Sadun and John Van Reenen, 2012, “Americans do I.T. better: US multinationals and the productivity miracle,” American Economic Review 102(1), pp. 167-201.[8]For more information about the Network visit http://www.ecb.europa.eu/home/html/researcher_compnet.en.html.[9]I wish to thank Marie Hoerova for the help in preparing this text.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen pleasur part session award germán bernácer prize nichola bloom professor econom stanford univers nichola bloom made influenti contribut academ debat two broad area great relev central bank policymak first research effect polici econom uncertainti busi cycl help us understand better key contribut factor protract slump output becom known great recess second research determin good manag practic firm level provid import insight support longterm econom growth competit includ european context financi econom crisi start summer brought unpreced challeng central bank policymak wellaccept paradigm wide use model come question thus import respons central bank ensur relev new insight academ research find way actual conduct monetari polici eurosystem attempt cope respons foster constant intellectu exchang research communiti ecb organis mani seminar confer workshop recent research find discuss invit lead scholar visit conduct research ecb exampl mean wim duisenberg fellowship moreov ecb support promis young research fund five lamfalussi fellowship year aim promot policyrelev research meet highest academ standard ecb also lead coordin research effort eurosystem research network obtain research output necessari ecb decisionmak yet unavail univers research institut come back activ one research network end remark research nichola bloom analys effect uncertainti shock economi prime exampl policyrelev research output publish econometrica could time unpreced level uncertainti one key distinguish featur great recess econom uncertainti refer environ littl noth known futur state economi varieti sourc econom uncertainti rang war act terror natur disast chang econom financi polici professor bloom highlight advers effect heighten uncertainti econom activ uncertainti lead firm cut back defer hire invest decis also drive consum put buy new good result uncertainti escal financi stress recess well stall labour market recoveri new attempt measur general event uncertainti varieti indic avoid trap revers causat econom fluctuat tri explain insert variabl dsge model professor bloom work uncertainti inspir research effect uncertainti includ link uncertainti monetari polici exampl idea chang uncertainti may interact monetari condit drive global financi cycl one theme year jackson hole econom polici symposium annual gather promin central banker financ minist lead academ financi market player around world latent natur uncertainti difficult quantifi measur indirect use varieti indic nichola bloom togeth scott baker stanford univers steven davi univers chicago made import contribut develop econom polici uncertainti index us europ major economi measur use academ paper also investor financi profession also subject intens discuss blogospher view polit use difficulti find good indic control avoid revers causat use polit event provid fodder debat professor bloom work measur uncertainti stimul systemat analysi uncertainti indic also ecb develop composit uncertainti indic combin four compon system stress uncertainti privat household firm polit uncertainti financi risk avers measur difficulti also issu professor bloom tackl second strand research name research role manag practic drive product growth differenti across compani across countri due absenc good qualiti data manag practic littl prior research conduct import topic address gap literatur nichola bloom togeth van reenen london school econom develop methodolog quantifi manag practic carri larg research project use new survey approach measur manag practic systemat way manufactur firm across europ us asia aspect manag practic approach focus systemat perform monitor set appropri target provid incent good perform show firm better manag practic larger product grow faster higher surviv rate conserv estim indic differ manag practic account signific proport differ product firm countri research stop document impact differ manag practic also offer suggest polici intervent could encourag uptak good manag behaviour competit flexibl market enabl manag reoptimis resourc within outsid firm easili educ standard matter well bettermanag firm better educ worker use effici moreov better educ manag necessari skill adopt stateoftheart manag practic adapt chang environ enabl maintain improv global competit posit multin compani also strong posit effect transplant manag style countri oper researchbas conclus highlight key role structur reform wake global econom crisi countri competit market condit better educ invest r d innov polici maximis benefici impact manageri capit product growth polici perspect competit issu identifi one root caus econom crisi europ therefor explicit includ surveil process establish eueuro area g level advanc research area eurosystem establish competit research network compnet end network object develop consist analyt framework assess competit one allow better correspond determin outcom network function uniqu forum differ approach measur competit discuss research develop eventu reconcil develop framework includ complementari use micro macro data lead improv analys competit issu confid nichola bloom continu make extraordinari contribut research area come year herewith extend sincerest congratul nichola win bernácer prize nichola bloom impact uncertainti shock econometrica pp see nichola bloom uncertainti shock debt disast caus doubledip recess voxeu org august scott baker nichola bloom steven j davi rocki balboa recoveri voxeu org june vast bodi literatur build nichola bloom uncertainti research name paper involv ecb research use german data popescu smet find uncertainti shock less import driver busi cycl compar financi risk avers shock see adina popescu frank smet uncertainti risktak busi cycl germani cesifo econom studi bekaert et al document lax monetari polici us decreas risk avers uncertainti former effect stronger see geert bekaert mari hoerova marco lo duca risk uncertainti monetari polici journal monetari econom see hélène rey dilemma trilemma global financi cycl monetari polici independ paper present jackson hole econom polici symposium incident hélène rey germán bernácer prize winner detail construct measur see scott baker nichola bloom steven j davi measur econom polici uncertainti work paper stanford univers see nichola bloom van reenen measur explain manag practic across firm countri quarter journal econom pp nichola bloom van reenen manag practic differ across firm countri journal econom perspect pp recent contribut nichola bloom coauthor show us multin obtain higher product nonus multin establish taken us multin nonus multin increas product attribut bulk product differ differ peopl manag practic across us nonus firm see nichola bloom raffaella sadun van reenen american better us multin product miracl american econom review pp inform network visit http www ecb europa euhomehtmlresearcher_compnet en html wish thank mari hoerova help prepar text reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en