Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The European Central Bank’s view on SEPA,13-02-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,3795,"<p>Mr Chairman, Senators, Ladies and Gentlemen: Thank you for giving me the opportunity to present the views of the European Central Bank on the SEPA project. When Jean Monnet, that outstanding Frenchman and great European, was asked what he would do differently if he could shape the process of European integration again, his answer was: “I would start with culture”.We do not know why he answered like this. Was it because he became aware of all the hurdles which stem from different perceptions, perspectives and lack of trust?Or was it because he thought starting with cultural integration would make European integration easier and long-lasting?European integration did not start with culture, but with the economy. Today, just a few weeks before the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome (signed on 25 March 1957), the free movement of capital and goods has been well and truly achieved, but other elements of the Treaty, like the free movement of services and workers, exist only on paper. European integration is clearly unfinished. The introduction of the euro as the single currency of Europe was seen as a political project. However it has resulted in deeper economic relations, created confidence and brought economic and monetary stability.SEPA is a new political project – European consumers, companies and other economic actors will be able to make and receive payments in euro throughout the euro area. As a result, SEPA will make payments more efficient, faster and in the medium term less expensive, although fees could become more visible than in the past.Today you have heard all about the pieces of the puzzle which belong to the SEPA project. A project that is even more complex than the introduction of the euro. Where do we stand today? The puzzle is half-finished – the framework has been set up, but much of the substance is still missing. The missing pieces will require all the energy of the players involved for a couple of years more.=> Slide 2 (Trois questions:)In my speech I will focus on three issues: Can commercial banks establish SEPA by themselves? What is the role of the public sector?Is there a need for speed, or can we sit back and relax?=> Slide 3 (Le SEPA est un espace…)SEPA is an area in which consumers, companies and other economic actors will be able to make and receive payments in euro, both across and within national boundaries, under the same basic conditions, rights and obligations, regardless of their location. The aim of SEPA is to complete the introduction of the euro as the single currency and to advance European integration. This is to be achieved by creating a competitive and innovative euro area retail payments market. This market will offer higher service levels and more efficient products for making payments.=> Slide 4 (Le SEPA se fonde sur la monnaie unique…)SEPA consists of the single currency, a single set of euro payment instruments – credit transfers, direct debits and card payments, efficient processing infrastructures for euro payments, common technical standards, common business practices, a harmonised legal basis, and ongoing development of new customer-oriented services. Now, let me turn to the first issue I would like to discuss today – the role of the commercial banking sector. Although SEPA is a political project, the European Payments Council and the national banking communities are doing a lot of the work. But can banks do it by themselves?Yes! Self-regulation and industry commitment have proven to be new ways of changing the market. The European Payments Council has taken up – with high commitment - the task of making SEPA a reality. When I review the state of play today, I see that the SEPA preparations are well under way; however, key steps still lie ahead of us. Banks are working on their product offerings, which they will launch on Tuesday 1 January 2008, exactly 46 weeks from now. In this respect, the credit transfer scheme has reached the end of the definition process and is now being implemented. The same holds for the direct debit schemes, although here an important issue is still open. Without going into details, the ECB would like to see the option of a debtor bank driven mandate flow for direct debits introduced. For both schemes, testing will start in a few months. However, customer involvement in the development of the new products still needs to be organised. And user awareness of SEPA is still limited. The infrastructures are preparing as well, with some signs in the market that true SEPA players are evolving. But some infrastructures appear to think that they can continue processing national payments only. And it is a pity that not all infrastructures have joined the work on standardisation. Card schemes are planning for the future; they will need to operate on a SEPA level. But, in contrast to the rulebooks for credit transfers and direct debits, the EPC has only developed a framework for cards. Whether a true SEPA for cards will be established in January 2008 remains therefore uncertain. But this new framework will guide card schemes on how they will need to operate on a SEPA level. => Slide 5 (Les travaux préparatoires)Despite the success of the self-regulatory approach, we should not forget what triggered it. Self-regulation and industry commitment have been the responses to the well-known Regulation No 2560/2001. It is a guarantee to consumers that when they make a payment in euro for a good or service in another Member State it will cost the same as it would have done in their own country. The same guarantee applies when they withdraw money from cash dispensers. This Regulation was adopted by the European Council of Ministers and the European Parliament after years of disappointment with a lack of integration in the field of payments. As prices for cross-border transactions did not drop significantly after the formation of the internal market in 1993, the European authorities started to monitor developments more closely. The continued high fees for cross-border payments led to the adoption of this Regulation. The intervention by the public authorities was strong and it has worked. A recent evaluation by the European Commission addresses to what extent cross-border charges have fallen since the adoption of the Regulation and whether bank charges to customers for national payments have increased. The analysis concludes that charges have dropped dramatically. At the same time, contrary to some concerns, charges for national payments have not increased to compensate for the reduced revenue from the cross-border payments. This shows that public intervention is sometimes a catalyst for change.While a Regulation was issued to set in motion the politically desired changes, a self-regulatory approach is required to develop a sound business model for SEPA. Let us not forget that retail payments cannot be compared with a public utility service, but are offered in a genuine market environment. However, almost all markets need a framework to enable them to function properly. A set of market rules should apply to create a level playing field, and the rules should be enforced to avoid anti-competitive behaviour. Before I consider the market rules, I wish to focus on obstacles in the market and on anti-competitive behaviour. The current national or scheme-bound orientation in payments has created some impregnable silos, in which scheme and proprietary processing are combined. Each silo is owned and controlled by groups of banks. These banks have no incentive to change because of the potential loss of invested capital. For outsiders, this fragmented and closed market structure imposes a huge barrier to entry. The common standards that the EPC has developed for payment instruments and for clearing and settlement mechanisms should make more competition possible. And as a consequence, payment schemes will benefit from more efficient processing. => Slide 6 (La dimension européenne peut…) Therefore, the Eurosystem has called for a split between scheme and infrastructure. This split should be at least financial and more than superficial: no cross-subsidisation between scheme and processing should exist. Furthermore, important scheme requirements as combating fraud should be organised in a processor-neutral way. Finally, the former proprietary processor should not be placed at an information-advantage concerning scheme changes which will require processing changes. In some cases a split has been made. However, it is doubtful whether these changes are more than cosmetic. The processing centres of most card schemes [and not only the international ones] remain proprietary or closely linked to the scheme. Also, proprietary Automated Clearing House (A-C-H) processing is an obstacle to competition. A potential second obstacle in the market is the development of Additional Optional Services, or AOS. The EPC has developed, as I mentioned before, new schemes for credit transfers and direct debits. These schemes will be used by banks to provide payment products all over the euro area. A market-driven migration to these new products will start as soon as they are introduced. In some countries however, the core and basic SEPA products will have to be enhanced by AOS in order to bring the new products up to the same level of quality as experienced today by the respective banking communities. It will ease the SEPA migration in these countries. The additional optional services may however be a threat to a true SEPA, since they could maintain the national orientation of payment systems. Therefore transparency is key, especially when these services are introduced at national level. I am pleased the EPC has recognised the need for transparency and has started to address this issue. A third obstacle is a continued differentiation between ‘domestic’ and intra-EU cross-border payments. This could happen if the operating rules of the automated clearing houses were still to make this distinction, or if national legal obligations were to prescribe the use of specific payment systems or message formats. National banking communities or national authorities should not prevent other banks or infrastructures from entering the market.Fourthly, the proper functioning of the market for SEPA card payments needs some additional elements: clarity regarding multilateral interchange fees, even though the Sector Inquiry Report of the European Commission provided guidancethe availability at the European scale of an alternative processing network card standardisation, the willingness of all market players to work on new initiatives.=> Slide 7 (Nécessité d’un nouvel effort…) The Eurosystem has voiced its expectations regarding SEPA for cards. There should be consumer choice, competitive markets and no geographical segmentation. Most importantly, the Eurosystem expects at least one European card scheme to emerge in the coming years.The Eurosystem welcomes the fact that the EPC is starting to work on standardisation for cards; this is needed urgently to create a European market for point-of-sale terminals and for cards acquiring. The Eurosystem welcomes the efforts of the international card schemes in preparing for SEPA and the SEPA changes they have already announced. Although the ECB does not favour any particular initiative, the Eurosystem appreciates the work being done by the Euro Alliance of Payment Schemes to establish interoperability between the participating card schemes. This work can be seen as the first step towards a consolidation of card schemes, leading to a European card scheme. The Eurosystem expects one or more European card schemes to emerge in the coming years. For the emergence of new European card schemes it is paramount that all European banking communities work together. Given the good track record of the French banking community in the cards business, the Eurosystem expects that they will be actively promote the creation of an integrated European cards market, and will help to build a true SEPA for cards.Now, let me turn to the second point of my presentation: the participation of the public sector. I mentioned the need for a sound set of rules to let the market function properly. As some of you are members of the Senate, you will be aware how important sound legislation is for the proper conduct of business. => Slide 8 (Les autorités publiques…)It is therefore very unfortunate that the adoption of the Payment Services Directive is delayed. The ongoing debate on the multilateral interchange fee from a competition policy point of view has created some complications in the planning process. We are pleased however that the European Network of Competition Authorities is now addressing these issues.The role of the European Parliament was discussed earlier today. I mentioned the delay in the adoption of the PSD. The ECB has followed this dossier closely in recent years. To us, it seems that the relevant articles for SEPA are relatively stable. It is more on the issues of payment institutions that debates are ongoing. As all SEPA-relevant aspects of the Directive are seen as uncontroversial, we believe that even if the PSD is not adopted, banks can work on the development and implementation of SEPA and, in particular, its direct debit products. The actual offering of the products, especially in the cross-border context, would however be difficult without the PSD having been adopted and transposed into national law. We have nevertheless heard from several banks that SEPA direct debit products could be rolled out by 1 January 2008 in a purely national context. This would certainly help to achieve critical mass, which is necessary to process this new SEPA payment instrument efficiently. For instance, tax authorities, which are domestic players only, can immediately use the SEPA direct debit for tax collection. They are not faced with a multi-country and multi-jurisdiction “client base”. For corporates with a multi-country base the approach will be different. => Slide 9 (L’adoption rapide…)Another issue in which legal clarity is vital is the possibility and the extent to which banks can rely on multilateral interchange fees to set up viable and mutually beneficial payment schemes. The Commission feels that the Sector Inquiry Report, together with the forthcoming MasterCard decision and the Cartes Bancaires case, will provide sufficient guidance to the market. In general, the Sector Inquiry Report focuses on the possibility of misuse of interchange fees (fee level and/or fee structure) based on market power. The Commission is not against interchange fees per se. This has been emphasised by the responsible Commissioner, Ms Kroes. She has publicly stated, referring to interchange fees, that the European Commission is “not arguing for their abolition. But it is clear that the present level of interchange fees in many of the schemes we have examined does not seem justified”.Market participants and public authorities need to come to a mutual understanding.. Such a mutual understanding could be based on a framework which would provide clarity on the use of multilateral interchange fees (MIFs) in payment schemes as well as on their calculation methodology. It should be founded on ‘payment-economics’, meaning the understanding of the way the market functions with regards to payment systems. This framework should then be agreed in principle by competition authorities. For example, the concept of a MIF could be endorsed as a means to balance the revenue-cost ratios between issuer and acquirer. This would make the offering of the payment instrument beneficial to both banks involved. As a consequence, innovative payment schemes can be introduced in the market and can be properly maintained. From a payment system policy view, this is an important goal. In this market, competition and the drive for efficiency will still be very much alive. Public authorities in Europe have played a major role in the formulation of the SEPA concept, but are lagging behind in preparing for its implementation. Public authorities initiate more than 20% of all retail payments. Given the fact that reaching a critical mass is vital for the efficiency of payment systems, public authorities could play a huge role in the SEPA migration by becoming launching customers of, or early adapters to, the new SEPA instruments. => Slide 10 (Le soutien politique…)On this point, I would like to compliment the French banking community, the Banque de France and the French public authorities working together on the preparations for SEPA. All are active participants in the French national committee for SEPA. I hope this active involvement of the public authorities will lead to an early use of the SEPA products, and so be a stimulus to the success of the entire SEPA project in Europe.Now, let me turn to my final point: how quickly do we need SEPA?I would say: as quickly as possible. The aims of SEPA are too important to accept delays in the implementation. All efforts should aim to deliver the SEPA products as of 1 January 2008. The momentum that has been gained in recent years should be maintained for the coming years.Individual banks should not try to find excuses for not delivering on time. And they should also be well aware that some banks, in particular the internationally active banks, already have made substantial investments in developing their SEPA product offerings. These internationally oriented banks see the great opportunities SEPA has to offer them and their clients. => Slide 11 (Le processus menant…)To get a clearer insight into the benefits of SEPA, which is the main topic of this Colloquium today, the ECB has initiated a SEPA impact study. The aim of the impact study is to carefully analyse the possible economic implications that SEPA may have for the various stakeholders, and mainly the banks. At present, only an estimation or, at best, limited information is available to measure the economic opportunities and challenges of SEPA. The ECB tries to enrich and complete its understanding about the potential economic consequences of SEPA for different scenarios and stages of the SEPA project. Furthermore, it envisages providing a clear picture of the expected economic impact for major SEPA stakeholders, and in particular for banks. The preliminary conclusions from the impact study are:The overall impact on costs and revenues for the banking industry is broadly moderate and less substantial than is often assumed.The financial impact of SEPA varies according to different scenarios and stages of the SEPA project.In the short run, the co-existence of SEPA schemes in parallel with the national schemes is expected to lead to initial investment costs and a relatively neutral impact on the revenue side for the banking industry.In the longer term, when national schemes are replaced by SEPA schemes, the costs for banks are expected to decrease because of potential economies of scale and scope and innovations (such as electronic invoicing). The revenue side will however also be (negatively) affected as competition will increase.Moreover, it seems that the impact on costs and revenues will be determined by the approach chosen by the banks. Banks that take a forward-looking view and opt for additional services which will automate the payment process will create new business opportunities.The changes which are required in the initial phase of setting up SEPA are substantial, and benefits can be reaped especially by those institutions that embrace new technological developments and provide innovative services.The ECB SEPA impact study shows that a short dual period is needed to reduce costs of SEPA migration.=> Slide 12 (La dimension européenne permettra…)The Eurosystem sees that SEPA is a market-driven process. All market barriers to open and fair competition should be removed. The European market will be big enough for four to six ACHs to achieve economies of scale (10 to 12 billion transactions annually), good business cases and good value propositions to their clients (banks). A market-driven consolidation should also take place in the ‘market’ for card schemes. However, the Eurosystem expects that the European market will be big enough to host more than two SEPA-compliant card schemes. Separate from the schemes, the processing of card transactions should consolidate to reach economies of scale, while remaining a competitive market. In the longer term, alignments could be sought in the clearing and settlement of giro payments (credit transfer, direct debit) and the clearing and settlement of card payments. SEPA operations and technology were also discussed this morning. The SEPA project is not a ‘one-shot operation”. It is an effort taking several years, which aims to make the current fragmented euro retail payments markets into a single domestic market. The EPC is developing the building blocks upon which the SEPA project is founded. Now that these building blocks are almost in place, it is time to move the retail payment market to the next level – an electronic environment where the SEPA payment instruments are used electronically and are combined with value-added services. Our challenge is to take full advantage of the technologies in place and offer customers convenient, secure and efficient services that will make their lives easier and at the same time will benefit the economy by securing end-to-end straight-through processing. This is what we refer to as eSEPA. To be truly successful with SEPA we must strengthen the cooperation between the different stakeholders. We must act now and agree on common standards that will ensure that any electronic device – mobile telephones, internet, PDAs (personal digital assistants) etc. can be used for value-added services and thereby guarantee that the whole value-chain from customer-to-bank-to-customer is paper- and cash-free.The introduction of the SEPA instruments could coincide with the introduction of greater transparency in the pricing of payment products. The ECB believes that transparency in services and prices would add crucial information for customers. => Slide 13 (Le SEPA et l’introduction…)The introduction of more direct charging for payment transactions is however not something to be taken lightly by banks. It takes time and effort to make customers aware, especially if they are used to the idea that making a payment is completely free of charge. Let me conclude by mentioning once again the Eurosystem’s main policy goal and the key measures for making SEPA a success.=> Slide 14 (Le SEPA a pour objectif…)The aim of SEPA is to complete the introduction of the euro as the single currency and to support European integration. The self-regulatory approach chosen for SEPA is working well, even though it took a European Regulation to set the process in motion. The preparations by banks, infrastructures and card schemes are now well under way, but important steps still lie ahead. Public authorities can support the project by providing legal clarity to the market with the Payment Services Directive. Furthermore, they should be among the early users of the new SEPA payment instruments. The first benefits to come from SEPA will be the new SEPA instruments. Secondly, SEPA will create a European playing field, which will bring significant economies of scale, mainly in processing. But markets need to be opened up to foster competition. A third benefit is that SEPA will allow for the introduction of payment innovations that respond to the needs of European customers. And finally, the SEPA will provide benefits for banks, especially to those banks that quickly seize the opportunities that SEPA offers. Thank you for your attention!Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",mr chairman senat ladi gentlemen thank give opportun present view european central bank sepa project jean monnet outstand frenchman great european ask would differ could shape process european integr answer would start cultur know answer like becam awar hurdl stem differ percept perspect lack trust thought start cultur integr would make european integr easier longlast european integr start cultur economi today week th anniversari treati rome sign march free movement capit good well truli achiev element treati like free movement servic worker exist paper european integr clear unfinish introduct euro singl currenc europ seen polit project howev result deeper econom relat creat confid brought econom monetari stabil sepa new polit project european consum compani econom actor abl make receiv payment euro throughout euro area result sepa make payment effici faster medium term less expens although fee could becom visibl past today heard piec puzzl belong sepa project project even complex introduct euro stand today puzzl halffinish framework set much substanc still miss miss piec requir energi player involv coupl year slide troi question speech focus three issu commerci bank establish sepa role public sector need speed sit back relax slide le sepa est un espac sepa area consum compani econom actor abl make receiv payment euro across within nation boundari basic condit right oblig regardless locat aim sepa complet introduct euro singl currenc advanc european integr achiev creat competit innov euro area retail payment market market offer higher servic level effici product make payment slide le sepa se fond sur la monnai uniqu sepa consist singl currenc singl set euro payment instrument credit transfer direct debit card payment effici process infrastructur euro payment common technic standard common busi practic harmonis legal basi ongo develop new customerori servic let turn first issu would like discuss today role commerci bank sector although sepa polit project european payment council nation bank communiti lot work bank yes selfregul industri commit proven new way chang market european payment council taken high commit task make sepa realiti review state play today see sepa prepar well way howev key step still lie ahead us bank work product offer launch tuesday januari exact week respect credit transfer scheme reach end definit process implement hold direct debit scheme although import issu still open without go detail ecb would like see option debtor bank driven mandat flow direct debit introduc scheme test start month howev custom involv develop new product still need organis user awar sepa still limit infrastructur prepar well sign market true sepa player evolv infrastructur appear think continu process nation payment piti infrastructur join work standardis card scheme plan futur need oper sepa level contrast rulebook credit transfer direct debit epc develop framework card whether true sepa card establish januari remain therefor uncertain new framework guid card scheme need oper sepa level slide les travaux préparatoir despit success selfregulatori approach forget trigger selfregul industri commit respons wellknown regul guarante consum make payment euro good servic anoth member state cost would done countri guarante appli withdraw money cash dispens regul adopt european council minist european parliament year disappoint lack integr field payment price crossbord transact drop signific format intern market european author start monitor develop close continu high fee crossbord payment led adopt regul intervent public author strong work recent evalu european commiss address extent crossbord charg fallen sinc adopt regul whether bank charg custom nation payment increas analysi conclud charg drop dramat time contrari concern charg nation payment increas compens reduc revenu crossbord payment show public intervent sometim catalyst chang regul issu set motion polit desir chang selfregulatori approach requir develop sound busi model sepa let us forget retail payment cannot compar public util servic offer genuin market environ howev almost market need framework enabl function proper set market rule appli creat level play field rule enforc avoid anticompetit behaviour consid market rule wish focus obstacl market anticompetit behaviour current nation schemebound orient payment creat impregn silo scheme proprietari process combin silo own control group bank bank incent chang potenti loss invest capit outsid fragment close market structur impos huge barrier entri common standard epc develop payment instrument clear settlement mechan make competit possibl consequ payment scheme benefit effici process slide la dimens européenn peut therefor eurosystem call split scheme infrastructur split least financi superfici crosssubsidis scheme process exist furthermor import scheme requir combat fraud organis processorneutr way final former proprietari processor place informationadvantag concern scheme chang requir process chang case split made howev doubt whether chang cosmet process centr card scheme intern one remain proprietari close link scheme also proprietari autom clear hous ach process obstacl competit potenti second obstacl market develop addit option servic ao epc develop mention new scheme credit transfer direct debit scheme use bank provid payment product euro area marketdriven migrat new product start soon introduc countri howev core basic sepa product enhanc ao order bring new product level qualiti experienc today respect bank communiti eas sepa migrat countri addit option servic may howev threat true sepa sinc could maintain nation orient payment system therefor transpar key especi servic introduc nation level pleas epc recognis need transpar start address issu third obstacl continu differenti domest intraeu crossbord payment could happen oper rule autom clear hous still make distinct nation legal oblig prescrib use specif payment system messag format nation bank communiti nation author prevent bank infrastructur enter market fourth proper function market sepa card payment need addit element clariti regard multilater interchang fee even though sector inquiri report european commiss provid guidanceth avail european scale altern process network card standardis willing market player work new initi slide nécessité d un nouvel effort eurosystem voic expect regard sepa card consum choic competit market geograph segment import eurosystem expect least one european card scheme emerg come year eurosystem welcom fact epc start work standardis card need urgent creat european market pointofsal termin card acquir eurosystem welcom effort intern card scheme prepar sepa sepa chang alreadi announc although ecb favour particular initi eurosystem appreci work done euro allianc payment scheme establish interoper particip card scheme work seen first step toward consolid card scheme lead european card scheme eurosystem expect one european card scheme emerg come year emerg new european card scheme paramount european bank communiti work togeth given good track record french bank communiti card busi eurosystem expect activ promot creation integr european card market help build true sepa card let turn second point present particip public sector mention need sound set rule let market function proper member senat awar import sound legisl proper conduct busi slide les autorité publiqu therefor unfortun adopt payment servic direct delay ongo debat multilater interchang fee competit polici point view creat complic plan process pleas howev european network competit author address issu role european parliament discuss earlier today mention delay adopt psd ecb follow dossier close recent year us seem relev articl sepa relat stabl issu payment institut debat ongo separelev aspect direct seen uncontroversi believ even psd adopt bank work develop implement sepa particular direct debit product actual offer product especi crossbord context would howev difficult without psd adopt transpos nation law nevertheless heard sever bank sepa direct debit product could roll januari pure nation context would certain help achiev critic mass necessari process new sepa payment instrument effici instanc tax author domest player immedi use sepa direct debit tax collect face multicountri multijurisdict client base corpor multicountri base approach differ slide l adopt rapid anoth issu legal clariti vital possibl extent bank reli multilater interchang fee set viabl mutual benefici payment scheme commiss feel sector inquiri report togeth forthcom mastercard decis cart bancair case provid suffici guidanc market general sector inquiri report focus possibl misus interchang fee fee level andor fee structur base market power commiss interchang fee per se emphasis respons commission ms kroe public state refer interchang fee european commiss argu abolit clear present level interchang fee mani scheme examin seem justifi market particip public author need come mutual understand mutual understand could base framework would provid clariti use multilater interchang fee mif payment scheme well calcul methodolog found paymenteconom mean understand way market function regard payment system framework agre principl competit author exampl concept mif could endors mean balanc revenuecost ratio issuer acquir would make offer payment instrument benefici bank involv consequ innov payment scheme introduc market proper maintain payment system polici view import goal market competit drive effici still much aliv public author europ play major role formul sepa concept lag behind prepar implement public author initi retail payment given fact reach critic mass vital effici payment system public author could play huge role sepa migrat becom launch custom earli adapt new sepa instrument slide le soutien politiqu point would like compliment french bank communiti banqu de franc french public author work togeth prepar sepa activ particip french nation committe sepa hope activ involv public author lead earli use sepa product stimulus success entir sepa project europ let turn final point quick need sepa would say quick possibl aim sepa import accept delay implement effort aim deliv sepa product januari momentum gain recent year maintain come year individu bank tri find excus deliv time also well awar bank particular intern activ bank alreadi made substanti invest develop sepa product offer intern orient bank see great opportun sepa offer client slide le processus menant get clearer insight benefit sepa main topic colloquium today ecb initi sepa impact studi aim impact studi care analys possibl econom implic sepa may various stakehold main bank present estim best limit inform avail measur econom opportun challeng sepa ecb tri enrich complet understand potenti econom consequ sepa differ scenario stage sepa project furthermor envisag provid clear pictur expect econom impact major sepa stakehold particular bank preliminari conclus impact studi overal impact cost revenu bank industri broad moder less substanti often assum financi impact sepa vari accord differ scenario stage sepa project short run coexist sepa scheme parallel nation scheme expect lead initi invest cost relat neutral impact revenu side bank industri longer term nation scheme replac sepa scheme cost bank expect decreas potenti economi scale scope innov electron invoic revenu side howev also negat affect competit increas moreov seem impact cost revenu determin approach chosen bank bank take forwardlook view opt addit servic autom payment process creat new busi opportun chang requir initi phase set sepa substanti benefit reap especi institut embrac new technolog develop provid innov servic ecb sepa impact studi show short dual period need reduc cost sepa migrat slide la dimens européenn permettra eurosystem see sepa marketdriven process market barrier open fair competit remov european market big enough four six ach achiev economi scale billion transact annual good busi case good valu proposit client bank marketdriven consolid also take place market card scheme howev eurosystem expect european market big enough host two sepacompli card scheme separ scheme process card transact consolid reach economi scale remain competit market longer term align could sought clear settlement giro payment credit transfer direct debit clear settlement card payment sepa oper technolog also discuss morn sepa project oneshot oper effort take sever year aim make current fragment euro retail payment market singl domest market epc develop build block upon sepa project found build block almost place time move retail payment market next level electron environ sepa payment instrument use electron combin valuead servic challeng take full advantag technolog place offer custom conveni secur effici servic make live easier time benefit economi secur endtoend straightthrough process refer esepa truli success sepa must strengthen cooper differ stakehold must act agre common standard ensur electron devic mobil telephon internet pdas person digit assist etc use valuead servic therebi guarante whole valuechain customertobanktocustom paper cashfre introduct sepa instrument could coincid introduct greater transpar price payment product ecb believ transpar servic price would add crucial inform custom slide le sepa et l introduct introduct direct charg payment transact howev someth taken light bank take time effort make custom awar especi use idea make payment complet free charg let conclud mention eurosystem main polici goal key measur make sepa success slide le sepa pour objectif aim sepa complet introduct euro singl currenc support european integr selfregulatori approach chosen sepa work well even though took european regul set process motion prepar bank infrastructur card scheme well way import step still lie ahead public author support project provid legal clariti market payment servic direct furthermor among earli user new sepa payment instrument first benefit come sepa new sepa instrument second sepa creat european play field bring signific economi scale main process market need open foster competit third benefit sepa allow introduct payment innov respond need european custom final sepa provid benefit bank especi bank quick seiz opportun sepa offer thank attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en