Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The governance of the euro area (eight years on),27-02-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,3331,"<p>The fact that the governance of the euro area is frequently discussed in academic and policy fora could suggest that the issue has not yet been settled, i.e. that there is not yet a clear governance framework for the euro area.This impression is wrong. The Treaty provides a clear governance structure for the euro area. The real question that one should address is whether the existing governance functions adequately and, if not, whether it should be changed or better implemented. The existing economic governance of the euro area can be analysed from three main viewpoints: the policies, the goals and the institutions:Policies:monetary policy fiscal policiesstructural policiesGoals:price stability income stabilisation sustainable long-term growthInstitutions:European Central Bank (and Eurosystem)Eurogroupnational governmentsThe governance of the euro area can be assessed on the basis of several criteria. I will concentrate on the criteria of effectiveness, accountability and efficiency. The following guiding principles can be adopted:effectiveness is pursued by assigning each policy instrument primarily to one objective;accountability is pursued by making each institution responsible primarily for one policy instrument;efficiency is pursued by designing institutional cooperation arrangements that allow each institution to take spillover effects into account. These principles are incorporated in the Treaty. As far as effectiveness is concerned, price stability is the main priority for monetary policy, cyclical stabilisation for budgetary policy and sustainable long-term growth for structural policies. Accountability is ensured in particular by the fact that monetary policy is the responsibility of a separate institution, the European Central Bank, which has to give a regular account of its actions. Cyclical stabilisation is assigned to national budgetary authorities and sustainable long-term growth to national governments. Finally, efficiency is ensured by a series of interinstitutional arrangements (in particular the Stability and Growth Pact) ensuring dialogue and cooperation between the various policy decision-makers. I will limit my analysis of the efficiency of the current governance of the euro area to three issues: monetary policy, the interaction between monetary policy and budgetary policies and the exchange rate policy of the euro.The first eight years of EMU confirm that the choice to assign monetary policy one primary objective – price stability – has been correct. In fact, since the Treaty was signed and ratified many other industrial and developing countries have modified the statutes of their central banks to make them independent and to assign them a clear objective, i.e. price stability. Notable examples are Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Sweden, Norway and Israel. [1] In none of these countries is there any more discussion on the issue of central bank independence and on the responsibility for price stability, whether in the academic or political sphere. Yet now in the euro area the issue of changing again the Treaty to give the ECB a direct responsibility for growth as well as price stability is occasionally raised, often just before elections.It should be clarified from the outset that these proposals have very little chance, if any, of succeeding. The Statute of the ESCB, which establishes independence and the primary objective of monetary policy, is enshrined in the Treaty. The Treaty cannot be changed, except with the unanimous support of 27 countries. The recent debate surrounding the French election campaign seems to suggest that no other country has any desire to change the Treaty in this respect. The discussion on changing the Statute of the ESCB might therefore seem fairly theoretical. In fact one could think that the issue has been raised precisely because it is theoretical and has no chance of actually being implemented. What is then the reason behind this debate? One hypothesis is that by focusing the discussion on the ECB, the latter becomes the scapegoat for domestic policy shortcomings. The main excuse that is given by those who ask for a change in the Statute of the ESCB is that the Federal Reserve System has a dual mandate, i.e. not only price stability but both price stability and growth. [2] If the ECB had a dual mandate – so goes the argument – it could implement a policy more favourable to growth, while at the same time preserving price stability. If the ECB had a dual mandate, it could – as the Federal Reserve System did between 2003 and 2004 – have pushed interest rates as low as 1%, thus giving a much greater stimulus to growth.Let me briefly explain why it would be inefficient in the current context to change the statute of an independent central bank so as to give it a dual objective of price stability and economic growth. I will make four points. First, neither the economic literature nor the empirical evidence provides support to the hypothesis according to which, ceteris paribus, a central bank can systematically implement an expansionary monetary policy that would stimulate economic activity without producing more inflation over time. Thus if the call for giving a dual mandate to the central bank is aimed at achieving systematically more growth, it is also implicitly an invitation to create more inflation. In fact, those that advocate a dual mandate implicitly suggest that inflation should be higher than the level targeted by the ECB (lower than but close to 2%). Indeed, some of these advocates even go to the point of suggesting that the ECB is “obsessed” by inflation. But is it really?European-wide opinion surveys seem to suggest the opposite. In the euro area, only a small minority of people consider that price stability is very well or fairly well ensured, while more than two-thirds think that it is not very well or not at all ensured. Furthermore, an overwhelming majority believes that it is important that the ECB preserves price stability and that the ECB should be independent in order to achieve this objective.  Second, it is now widely recognised that in modern economies with developed and efficient financial markets, the best way for monetary policy to support economic growth, in particular through low ex ante real interest rates, is for the central bank to be perceived to be credible in its anti-inflationary stance. The traditional analytical framework based on the Phillips curve shows that growth can be enhanced not by increasing inflation but by shifting the whole trade-off to more favourable terms by lowering inflation expectations. How can inflation expectations be lowered? By giving the central bank a clear objective of price stability.Recent experience shows that interest rates can be at low levels in the euro area only because the ECB is perceived by the markets to be fully committed to price stability. The third point is that the existence of a dual mandate is likely to reduce the transparency of monetary policy. In particular, any central bank with a dual mandate would have difficulties in clearly specifying the objective for price stability, in quantitative terms, without also having to specify an objective for employment or growth. However, defining ex ante a plausible combination of quantified objectives represents an impossible task, given that so many factors other than monetary policy can affect inflation and growth. If the central bank achieved one goal, but not the other, it would easily be subject ex post to criticism for having favoured one objective at the expense of the other. This is the reason why central banks with dual mandates tend not to specify, in a clear and understandable manner for the public at large, the quantitative definition of price stability for which it is accountable.The fourth, and related point, is that a dual mandate cannot be easily reconcilable with the independence of the central bank. A central bank with a dual mandate would have to constantly choose ex ante between growth and price stability, assuming – again – that there was such a choice. If the central bank was indeed led to make such a choice, it would immediately be subject to the criticism that in modern democracies only elected representatives are allowed to choose between alternative objectives that affect the well-being of citizens. Specific policies can be delegated to independent non-elected institutions only to the extent that the latter have a very precise mandate. If the ECB did not have a very precise mandate, and was able to choose between two different and contrasting objectives, some would claim that it should be subjected to political guidance. In fact, one could suspect that the request to provide the ECB with a dual mandate is ultimately motivated by the wish to reduce the independence of the ECB.The analogy with the Federal Reserve System, which is often mentioned by the proponents of the dual mandate, is not relevant and is misleading for a number of reasons. First, the statutes of the Federal Reserve System date back to the end of the 1970s and have not been modified since to take into account developments in the literature on rational expectations and the time inconsistency of optimal monetary policy, which are at the basis of modern central banking. On the other hand, even with a dual mandate, the Federal Reserve System constantly reminds market participants, the public at large and the political authorities that its objectives are price stability and growth and employment, “in that order”. [3] In all their speeches, Federal Reserve System Chairmen, lately Alan Greenspan and Ben S. Bernanke, have reiterated that the best contribution that monetary policy can make to sustainable growth is to ensure price stability in a credible manner. The latest discussions in the US Congress seem to confirm that the dual mandate might indeed be an obstacle for making the definition of the objective of price stability more explicit, as would be desirable from the point of view of the central bank’s accountability. Finally, there is now research that shows that in the recent cycle, controlling for the differences in economic structures and the nature of macroeconomic shocks between the United States and the euro area, the policy enacted by the Federal Reserve System has not been more supportive of economic activity than that of the ECB. [4]To sum up, the governance of the euro area with respect to the ECB, its monetary policy and its objective of price stability have been clearly agreed in 1992 and ratified by all countries. It has become state of the art in industrial countries and is fully consistent with mainstream economic literature. The bottom line is that there is no need to change.I will not comment extensively on the two other policies, i.e. budgetary and structural policies. According to the Treaty, these are the competence of national authorities. There is nevertheless an issue of interaction among the various policies and policy actors, given that these policies might affect not only the objective that they target primarily but also the other objectives. The interaction takes place at two levels: i) at the European level, among the various European institutions; and ii) between the European and the national levels, for a given policy. At the European level, the interaction between the authorities in charge of monetary, budgetary and structural policies is well codified in the Treaty. This is also consistent with the mainstream literature and with the experience in most industrial countries. The main goal of the interaction is neither to blur responsibilities nor to make pre-commitments between independent institutions but to ensure an appropriate exchange of information so that each policy can be conducted on the basis of the best possible knowledge of the economic environment. The exchange of information between the ECB and the finance ministries takes place in various fora. Every month the ECB President attends the Eurogroup meetings. These meetings are prepared by the Euro Working Group, which comprises the deputies of the euro area finance ministers and ECB representatives. Furthermore, the President of the Eurogroup and the Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs are invited to attend each meeting of the ECB Governing Council, which takes place every fortnight. This allows both of them to be at the core of monetary policy-making, obviously without the right to vote, and to benefit from all the discussions leading to the final decision. This arrangement is without analogy in other industrial countries.Any meeting between the ECB and the Eurogroup can be held at any time, if needed, to discuss issues of relevance. The dialogue between the various European institutions takes place with due regard to the independence of each and works appropriately. There appears to be no need to formalise in any bureaucratic way the format of the dialogue beyond what is already provided for. The second type of policy interaction is between the European and national levels, in particular in the Eurogroup. Budgetary policies are conducted at the national level, in the context of the coordination process provided by the Stability and Growth Pact and the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines. One question to be asked is whether such policy cooperation is effective and efficient in achieving the desired objectives, such as income stabilisation and sustainable long-term growth.I will not address this issue today. I would just note that some people have expressed disappointment at the way in which the Eurogroup has been able to exercise its prerogatives in the budgetary field. Some progress has been achieved over the years in terms of improving the functioning of the Eurogroup, for instance by lengthening the term of its presidency from six months to two years.The call for creating some sort of European economic government is frequently proposed. However, these calls have never really been substantiated with concrete proposals, aimed at effectively improving the conduct of national budgetary policies and at implementing a coordinated policy action at the euro area level. I recently made some proposals, related in particular to the way in which budgetary policies are prepared in the Member States, with a view to taking better into account the European dimension and the interaction with budgetary policies conducted in other countries. [5] The problem is that the Member States, including those that have been calling for a strengthening of the Eurogroup, have resisted adapting even their national budgetary procedures to the European context. Overall, there does not seem to be any desire within national or European policy circles to shift decision-making powers from the former to the latter. Incidentally, the prevailing economic literature does not support such a move. [6]In this context, the suspicion may arise that the call for such a government is motivated mainly by the attempt to exert influence on the ECB’s monetary policy.A final word on international economic policies and cooperation. In this field the euro area member countries continue to exercise their national sovereignty separately, in the IMF, the G7 and other fora. Some coordination takes place to try to achieve common positions, but the degree of success is unequal. Although the current situation is quite inefficient and does not allow for synergies to be maximised, there is still strong resistance within some policy circles to a more unified and consistent approach. This is why, in my personal view, the euro area has a political role that does not match its potential, in light of its population of over 310 million and a GDP comparable with that of the United States. [7]The governance of the euro area on exchange rate policy is specified in the Treaty. The choice of exchange rate regime is made by the EU Council of Ministers, after consulting the ECB in an endeavour to reach a consensus consistent with the objective of price stability. It was decided at the start of EMU that the exchange rate regime of the euro would be a purely floating regime, similar to that in other major industrial countries.In the current regime, the responsibility for conducting foreign exchange interventions is exclusively the competence of the ECB. The EU Council, acting by qualified majority, can formulate general orientations for exchange rate policies. It can only do this on a recommendation by the European Commission or the ECB. These orientations cannot be in contradiction with the ECB’s primary objective of promoting price stability. No general orientation has been given thus far. Arrangements in the euro area differ somewhat from those in other major countries, such as the United States and Japan, where the responsibility for foreign exchange policy, including interventions, is within the competence of finance ministries. However, experience has shown that the euro area arrangements are fairly balanced and are consistent with the way in which financial markets work in advanced economies. Indeed, the involvement of the central bank, and consistency with monetary policy, is essential for the effective implementation of any foreign exchange policy. In addition, any foreign exchange policy, including intervention in the foreign exchange markets, is likely to be ineffective unless it is agreed with the other major partners, in particular the G7.In the euro area, the decision concerning foreign exchange interventions remains exclusively with the ECB. There is a strong interaction with the Eurogroup, with a view to achieve a common position with the other main partners, in particular the United States and Japan. The euro area has always acted united in the relevant fora, such as the G7, where common positions on exchange rate issues are achieved and expressed in public, in particular through the G7 communiqués. From this point of view, the present arrangements are working properly, and even better than in some other countries. To be effective, policy messages on exchange rates have to be consistent, within institutions, between institutions and across countries. This is the main reason for having G7 communiqués, so that they can be used consistently by all G7 members for consistent public communication. For the euro area this would imply that public communication on exchange rate issues should be conducted mainly by the President of the ECB and the President of the Eurogroup, consistent with the practice of the other main partners. The members of the Eurogroup should thus align their communication to the message agreed between the ECB and the Eurogroup Presidency. When euro area finance ministers express themselves on exchange rate issues in terms that differ from each other and from the agreed euro area and G7 positions, the most likely outcome on financial markets is the opposite of that intended. Indeed, market participants interpret differences in words as potential disagreements between policy-makers and tend to push rates in the opposite direction to that desired by the authority making the statement. This confusion also undermines the authority of the President of the Eurogroup to speak on behalf of the euro area finance ministers. Overall, although the current arrangements on the exchange rate policy of the euro area are well designed, they probably need to be better implemented, in particular to achieve more stringent verbal discipline. To conclude, there is a clear framework for the economic governance of EMU. It is fully implemented as far as monetary policy and the coordination between the ECB and the Eurogroup is concerned, in particular with respect to exchange rate policy.There is certainly room for improvement in several areas. The first is the coordination, within the Eurogroup, of budgetary policy, to improve the conduct of national policies. The second is the external representation of the euro area, in particular in international financial institutions.[1] In the case of Canada, Israel and New Zealand, the adoption of an inflation targeting scheme was agreed on slightly earlier than the signing of the Treaty.[2] In fact the Federal Reserve System has a triple mandate, as it has to ensure low long-term interest rates.[3] As FOMC member Anthony M. Santomero was quoted as saying in the Financial Times of 30 September 2005. [4] See the article entitled “Monetary policy “activism”” in the November 2006 issue of the Monthly Bulletin. [5] See “Decision-making in the euro area lacks synchronisation”, Financial Times, 8 September 2005.[6] See, for instance, Bini Smaghi and Tabellini (2003), “How to Improve Economic Governance. The Coordination of Macroeconomic Policies in Europe”, Aspen European Dialogue, February. [7] See “Powerless Europe: Why is the Euro Area Still a Political Dwarf?” International Finance, 9:2, 2006.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",fact govern euro area frequent discuss academ polici fora could suggest issu yet settl e yet clear govern framework euro area impress wrong treati provid clear govern structur euro area real question one address whether exist govern function adequ whether chang better implement exist econom govern euro area analys three main viewpoint polici goal institut polici monetari polici fiscal policiesstructur policiesgo price stabil incom stabilis sustain longterm growthinstitut european central bank eurosystem eurogroupn governmentsth govern euro area assess basi sever criteria concentr criteria effect account effici follow guid principl adopt effect pursu assign polici instrument primarili one object account pursu make institut respons primarili one polici instrument effici pursu design institut cooper arrang allow institut take spillov effect account principl incorpor treati far effect concern price stabil main prioriti monetari polici cyclic stabilis budgetari polici sustain longterm growth structur polici account ensur particular fact monetari polici respons separ institut european central bank give regular account action cyclic stabilis assign nation budgetari author sustain longterm growth nation govern final effici ensur seri interinstitut arrang particular stabil growth pact ensur dialogu cooper various polici decisionmak limit analysi effici current govern euro area three issu monetari polici interact monetari polici budgetari polici exchang rate polici euro first eight year emu confirm choic assign monetari polici one primari object price stabil correct fact sinc treati sign ratifi mani industri develop countri modifi statut central bank make independ assign clear object e price stabil notabl exampl canada unit kingdom australia new zealand sweden norway israel none countri discuss issu central bank independ respons price stabil whether academ polit sphere yet euro area issu chang treati give ecb direct respons growth well price stabil occasion rais often elect clarifi outset propos littl chanc succeed statut escb establish independ primari object monetari polici enshrin treati treati cannot chang except unanim support countri recent debat surround french elect campaign seem suggest countri desir chang treati respect discuss chang statut escb might therefor seem fair theoret fact one could think issu rais precis theoret chanc actual implement reason behind debat one hypothesi focus discuss ecb latter becom scapegoat domest polici shortcom main excus given ask chang statut escb feder reserv system dual mandat e price stabil price stabil growth ecb dual mandat goe argument could implement polici favour growth time preserv price stabil ecb dual mandat could feder reserv system push interest rate low thus give much greater stimulus growth let briefli explain would ineffici current context chang statut independ central bank give dual object price stabil econom growth make four point first neither econom literatur empir evid provid support hypothesi accord ceteri paribus central bank systemat implement expansionari monetari polici would stimul econom activ without produc inflat time thus call give dual mandat central bank aim achiev systemat growth also implicit invit creat inflat fact advoc dual mandat implicit suggest inflat higher level target ecb lower close inde advoc even go point suggest ecb obsess inflat realli europeanwid opinion survey seem suggest opposit euro area small minor peopl consid price stabil well fair well ensur twothird think well ensur furthermor overwhelm major believ import ecb preserv price stabil ecb independ order achiev object second wide recognis modern economi develop effici financi market best way monetari polici support econom growth particular low ex ant real interest rate central bank perceiv credibl antiinflationari stanc tradit analyt framework base phillip curv show growth enhanc increas inflat shift whole tradeoff favour term lower inflat expect inflat expect lower give central bank clear object price stabil recent experi show interest rate low level euro area ecb perceiv market fulli commit price stabil third point exist dual mandat like reduc transpar monetari polici particular central bank dual mandat would difficulti clear specifi object price stabil quantit term without also specifi object employ growth howev defin ex ant plausibl combin quantifi object repres imposs task given mani factor monetari polici affect inflat growth central bank achiev one goal would easili subject ex post critic favour one object expens reason central bank dual mandat tend specifi clear understand manner public larg quantit definit price stabil account fourth relat point dual mandat cannot easili reconcil independ central bank central bank dual mandat would constant choos ex ant growth price stabil assum choic central bank inde led make choic would immedi subject critic modern democraci elect repres allow choos altern object affect wellb citizen specif polici deleg independ nonelect institut extent latter precis mandat ecb precis mandat abl choos two differ contrast object would claim subject polit guidanc fact one could suspect request provid ecb dual mandat ultim motiv wish reduc independ ecb analog feder reserv system often mention propon dual mandat relev mislead number reason first statut feder reserv system date back end modifi sinc take account develop literatur ration expect time inconsist optim monetari polici basi modern central bank hand even dual mandat feder reserv system constant remind market particip public larg polit author object price stabil growth employ order speech feder reserv system chairmen late alan greenspan ben bernank reiter best contribut monetari polici make sustain growth ensur price stabil credibl manner latest discuss us congress seem confirm dual mandat might inde obstacl make definit object price stabil explicit would desir point view central bank account final research show recent cycl control differ econom structur natur macroeconom shock unit state euro area polici enact feder reserv system support econom activ ecb sum govern euro area respect ecb monetari polici object price stabil clear agre ratifi countri becom state art industri countri fulli consist mainstream econom literatur bottom line need chang comment extens two polici e budgetari structur polici accord treati compet nation author nevertheless issu interact among various polici polici actor given polici might affect object target primarili also object interact take place two level european level among various european institut ii european nation level given polici european level interact author charg monetari budgetari structur polici well codifi treati also consist mainstream literatur experi industri countri main goal interact neither blur respons make precommit independ institut ensur appropri exchang inform polici conduct basi best possibl knowledg econom environ exchang inform ecb financ ministri take place various fora everi month ecb presid attend eurogroup meet meet prepar euro work group compris deputi euro area financ minist ecb repres furthermor presid eurogroup commission econom monetari affair invit attend meet ecb govern council take place everi fortnight allow core monetari policymak obvious without right vote benefit discuss lead final decis arrang without analog industri countri meet ecb eurogroup held time need discuss issu relev dialogu various european institut take place due regard independ work appropri appear need formalis bureaucrat way format dialogu beyond alreadi provid second type polici interact european nation level particular eurogroup budgetari polici conduct nation level context coordin process provid stabil growth pact broad econom polici guidelin one question ask whether polici cooper effect effici achiev desir object incom stabilis sustain longterm growth address issu today would note peopl express disappoint way eurogroup abl exercis prerog budgetari field progress achiev year term improv function eurogroup instanc lengthen term presid six month two year call creat sort european econom govern frequent propos howev call never realli substanti concret propos aim effect improv conduct nation budgetari polici implement coordin polici action euro area level recent made propos relat particular way budgetari polici prepar member state view take better account european dimens interact budgetari polici conduct countri problem member state includ call strengthen eurogroup resist adapt even nation budgetari procedur european context overal seem desir within nation european polici circl shift decisionmak power former latter incident prevail econom literatur support move context suspicion may aris call govern motiv main attempt exert influenc ecb monetari polici final word intern econom polici cooper field euro area member countri continu exercis nation sovereignti separ imf g fora coordin take place tri achiev common posit degre success unequ although current situat quit ineffici allow synergi maximis still strong resist within polici circl unifi consist approach person view euro area polit role match potenti light popul million gdp compar unit state govern euro area exchang rate polici specifi treati choic exchang rate regim made eu council minist consult ecb endeavour reach consensus consist object price stabil decid start emu exchang rate regim euro would pure float regim similar major industri countri current regim respons conduct foreign exchang intervent exclus compet ecb eu council act qualifi major formul general orient exchang rate polici recommend european commiss ecb orient cannot contradict ecb primari object promot price stabil general orient given thus far arrang euro area differ somewhat major countri unit state japan respons foreign exchang polici includ intervent within compet financ ministri howev experi shown euro area arrang fair balanc consist way financi market work advanc economi inde involv central bank consist monetari polici essenti effect implement foreign exchang polici addit foreign exchang polici includ intervent foreign exchang market like ineffect unless agre major partner particular g euro area decis concern foreign exchang intervent remain exclus ecb strong interact eurogroup view achiev common posit main partner particular unit state japan euro area alway act unit relev fora g common posit exchang rate issu achiev express public particular g communiqué point view present arrang work proper even better countri effect polici messag exchang rate consist within institut institut across countri main reason g communiqué use consist g member consist public communic euro area would impli public communic exchang rate issu conduct main presid ecb presid eurogroup consist practic main partner member eurogroup thus align communic messag agre ecb eurogroup presid euro area financ minist express exchang rate issu term differ agre euro area g posit like outcom financi market opposit intend inde market particip interpret differ word potenti disagr policymak tend push rate opposit direct desir author make statement confus also undermin author presid eurogroup speak behalf euro area financ minist overal although current arrang exchang rate polici euro area well design probabl need better implement particular achiev stringent verbal disciplin conclud clear framework econom govern emu fulli implement far monetari polici coordin ecb eurogroup concern particular respect exchang rate polici certain room improv sever area first coordin within eurogroup budgetari polici improv conduct nation polici second extern represent euro area particular intern financi institut case canada israel new zealand adopt inflat target scheme agre slight earlier sign treati fact feder reserv system tripl mandat ensur low longterm interest rate fomc member anthoni m santomero quot say financi time septemb see articl entitl monetari polici activ novemb issu month bulletin see decisionmak euro area lack synchronis financi time septemb see instanc bini smaghi tabellini improv econom govern coordin macroeconom polici europ aspen european dialogu februari see powerless europ euro area still polit dwarf intern financ reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en