Jean-Claude Trichet: Economic diversity on both sides of the Atlantic,16-06-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,1940,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,It is a great pleasure for me to speak to you here tonight. The past few years have been a testing time for the economies of both the United States and Europe. We were faced with the worst financial and economic crisis since the Second World War. Still today – on both sides of the Atlantic – we are dealing with the consequences of the crisis – for economic growth, for employment and for government finances. The crisis has also exposed the United States and Europe to a number of asymmetric shocks – in which different parts of our economies have had a wide diversity of experience. Some countries within the euro area are the particular focus of market attention at the moment as a result of their sovereign debt issues.Some observers have been wondering how diversity can be dealt with in Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), what it means for monetary policy and whether the variations in economic conditions are aggravated by product and labour market rigidities. It has often been argued that economic diversity or heterogeneity is very significantly larger in Europe than in the United States. We at the European Central Bank (ECB) have been looking closely at the degree of diversity in the two large, continental advanced economies on either side of the Atlantic. And some of the findings from this comparison are quite interesting. Because they show that economic diversity within the two currency areas is very similar in many ways. The analysis also shows that, in fact, in a large number of respects the two economies are similarly diverse. I would like to share some of the key insights of this analysis with you tonight.The United States and Europe are often compared. This is quite natural. Americans and Europeans share a common cultural legacy. But our two economies, and I am speaking here of the economy of the euro area on our side, are also similar. Both are of similar size, in terms of population and in terms of economic output. Both have closely integrated financial and product markets. And both have a single currency.Let me begin my comparison with an economic indicator that is particularly close to a central banker’s heart: inflation. In historical terms, overall inflation has been low and stable in both the United States and the euro area since the late 1990s. The ECB aims at an inflation rate of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Since the inception of the euro, the ECB has achieved that objective. Annual inflation in the euro area has been 1.97% on average over the first 12 years.Importantly, the standard deviation in inflation across the members of the euro area has been around 1%. And it has remained broadly stable at similar levels to those observed in the US Metropolitan Statistical Areas. From that standpoint prices in the euro area are broadly homogenous and similar to those in the United States. My second point of comparison is how diverse the United States and the euro area are in terms of economic growth. The results here are similar to that for inflation. First of all, the overall growth rates over the first twelve years of the euro were actually quite similar in the euro area to those in the US, once you adjust for differences in population growth. In both the euro area and the US, per capita growth was about 1% during 1999-2010. As concerns dispersion within the economies, before the crisis, the standard deviation of growth rates was around 2% in both the euro area and the United States. Dispersion rose somewhat during the crisis in both currency areas but remained broadly in line with pre-crisis patterns. [1]Allow me to go one step further and compare the sources of this growth dispersion in the United States and the euro area. Both currency areas include regions that experienced a significant boom-and-bust cycle over the past decade. Both also contain regions that are facing significant structural challenges of a more long-term nature.Let me start off with the United States. Here, several states experienced increases in house prices that outpaced the national average by a wide margin. The steep house price increases probably contributed to above average growth in these states, owing to strong positive contributions from real estate, construction and financial services. Nevada, Arizona, Florida and California are good examples, where average growth between 1998 and 2006 exceeded that of most other states. The sharp fall in house prices in recent years turned boom into bust. These states experienced the harshest recession among the US states. At the same time, some other US states have seen a long period of below average growth, particularly the former manufacturing powerhouses in the ''Great Lakes'' region. Structural shifts in the US economy towards services have gradually reduced the value added of manufacturing relative to GDP. In the decade before the financial crisis, growth rates in states with a high concentration of companies in manufacturing industries other than information and communications technology, such as Michigan and Ohio, were lower than in most other US states. Unsurprisingly, GDP growth in these regions remained below average during the crisis.The euro area also contains examples of these two types of regions. On the one hand, some countries experienced asymmetric boom-and-bust cycles. Several euro area countries had higher than average growth in the pre-crisis years. For example, up to 2006, growth in Ireland was higher than in most other euro area economies, owing much to large increases in house prices. On the other hand, a few euro area countries – Portugal for example – experienced growth below the euro area average in the decade preceding the crisis. This was typically a consequence of structural issues that could have been tackled earlier and with more determination. Just a few years ago, this group of countries included Germany, then labelled completely wrongly the “sick man of Europe”. Yet Germany is now an example of how big the dividends of reform can be if structural adjustment is made a strategic priority and implemented with sufficient patience.In short, the effects of the crisis on the different economies in the euro area follow a similar pattern to those in the United States. The countries in the euro area that have been hit hardest are those in which either large asset-bubble driven imbalances unwound or structural problems were left unaddressed before the crisis. More specifically, Ireland and Greece, in particular, remained in recession in 2010. Those countries that have yet to implement more far reaching structural reforms also have relatively low growth prospects after the crisis. These relatively low growth rates are linked to a deterioration of competitiveness, driven by persistent losses in relative competitiveness, for example by above average increases in relative labour costs.Again, this problem is not isolated to the euro area. Disregarding the most recent countries to join the euro area, dispersion of unit labour costs is similar in the euro area and the United States, both before and during the crisis. It is worth noting that both currency areas include regions with persistently above or below average unit labour cost growth. Again leaving aside the most recent countries to join the euro area, Greece, Portugal and Ireland, in particular, have lost competitiveness vis-à-vis their main trading partners in the euro area. Germany, in contrast, has been able to lower relative unit labour costs. There have been similar persistent losses and gains in competitiveness in the United States. Some states have experienced large or persistent increases in unit labour costs, currently exceeding the national average by as much as 20%. Other states have been gaining competitiveness vis-à-vis the national average over the past decade.In summary, economic heterogeneity in the euro area and the United States has been broadly similar on a number of measures over the past 12 years. But the crisis has shown us that this should be no reason for any complacency in the euro area. Persistent losses in competitiveness on the part of individual members in a currency union lead to a build-up of external and internal imbalances. When these unravel, the cost for the affected economies can be large. They can also have spillover effects on other members of the currency union.In any union, an economic governance framework is needed to prevent developments in an individual member state endangering the smooth functioning of the union. This is particularly true in a currency union that – in contrast to the United States – does not have a large federal budget to balance severe asymmetric developments.For EMU, the economic governance framework devised in the 1990s has not been correctly implemented and, in any case, has proved too weak during the crisis. As I speak today, the reform debate is still in progress. Allow me to take a few more minutes to outline the reforms required to make Europe’s institutions of economic governance commensurate with monetary union.As you may know, the ECB takes the strong view that there is the need for more speed and automaticity in the sanctioning mechanism. This is particularly true for the Stability and Growth Pact, the EU’s framework for fiscal governance. But it is also the case for the broader framework for macroeconomic policy surveillance. The experience of recent months has vividly demonstrated the importance of a timely correction of internal and external imbalances.But faster and more automatic sanctions alone will not be enough. The enforcement tools will also need to be made more effective. The macroeconomic surveillance framework, in particular, needs to provide clear incentives for sound policies in the member states by imposing financial sanctions at an early stage. This also means that there should be no room for discretion in the implementation of the surveillance framework. At the same time, requirements on fiscal and other macroeconomic policies should be more ambitious. To ensure that none of the euro area members are left behind, they have to bring national policies in line with membership of a currency union.Finally, the implementation of sound fiscal and macroeconomic policies is best ensured if these are solidly anchored at the national level. An effective way of achieving this is to implement strong national budgetary frameworks in the members of the euro area. Let me conclude. The European Union and the Euro area on one side of the Atlantic, the United States on the other side not only share the common heritage of their culture and their nature of advanced economies. They are not only of similar size. Our economies are also showing remarkable resemblance in their diversity – among the 50 states on this side of the Atlantic and among the 17 euro area members on the other side. This is true for both the euro area and the United States before the crisis and also in their reaction to the asymmetric shocks during the crisis. Therefore we have a common challenge. That of governing, in the best fashion possible, very large and similarly diversified economies as regards the economic features of member countries and states. This is naturally done in the US through the federal institutional framework. We Europeans need to reform our economic governance framework, as I have briefly outlined here tonight. Here, we would do well to heed the words of Alexander Hamilton, a founding father of America’s economic and political union,. Just as Hamilton once called to his fellow Americans, we Europeans should call on our leaders to “learn to think (more) continentally”.Thank you for your attention.[1]The 2010 data for US regions are provisional estimates published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis on 7 June 2011.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur speak tonight past year test time economi unit state europ face worst financi econom crisi sinc second world war still today side atlant deal consequ crisi econom growth employ govern financ crisi also expos unit state europ number asymmetr shock differ part economi wide divers experi countri within euro area particular focus market attent moment result sovereign debt issu observ wonder divers dealt europ econom monetari union emu mean monetari polici whether variat econom condit aggrav product labour market rigid often argu econom divers heterogen signific larger europ unit state european central bank ecb look close degre divers two larg continent advanc economi either side atlant find comparison quit interest show econom divers within two currenc area similar mani way analysi also show fact larg number respect two economi similar divers would like share key insight analysi tonight unit state europ often compar quit natur american european share common cultur legaci two economi speak economi euro area side also similar similar size term popul term econom output close integr financi product market singl currenc let begin comparison econom indic particular close central banker heart inflat histor term overal inflat low stabl unit state euro area sinc late ecb aim inflat rate close medium term sinc incept euro ecb achiev object annual inflat euro area averag first year import standard deviat inflat across member euro area around remain broad stabl similar level observ us metropolitan statist area standpoint price euro area broad homogen similar unit state second point comparison divers unit state euro area term econom growth result similar inflat first overal growth rate first twelv year euro actual quit similar euro area us adjust differ popul growth euro area us per capita growth concern dispers within economi crisi standard deviat growth rate around euro area unit state dispers rose somewhat crisi currenc area remain broad line precrisi pattern allow go one step compar sourc growth dispers unit state euro area currenc area includ region experienc signific boomandbust cycl past decad also contain region face signific structur challeng longterm natur let start unit state sever state experienc increas hous price outpac nation averag wide margin steep hous price increas probabl contribut averag growth state owe strong posit contribut real estat construct financi servic nevada arizona florida california good exampl averag growth exceed state sharp fall hous price recent year turn boom bust state experienc harshest recess among us state time us state seen long period averag growth particular former manufactur powerhous great lake region structur shift us economi toward servic gradual reduc valu ad manufactur relat gdp decad financi crisi growth rate state high concentr compani manufactur industri inform communic technolog michigan ohio lower us state unsurpris gdp growth region remain averag crisi euro area also contain exampl two type region one hand countri experienc asymmetr boomandbust cycl sever euro area countri higher averag growth precrisi year exampl growth ireland higher euro area economi owe much larg increas hous price hand euro area countri portug exampl experienc growth euro area averag decad preced crisi typic consequ structur issu could tackl earlier determin year ago group countri includ germani label complet wrong sick man europ yet germani exampl big dividend reform structur adjust made strateg prioriti implement suffici patienc short effect crisi differ economi euro area follow similar pattern unit state countri euro area hit hardest either larg assetbubbl driven imbal unwound structur problem left unaddress crisi specif ireland greec particular remain recess countri yet implement far reach structur reform also relat low growth prospect crisi relat low growth rate link deterior competit driven persist loss relat competit exampl averag increas relat labour cost problem isol euro area disregard recent countri join euro area dispers unit labour cost similar euro area unit state crisi worth note currenc area includ region persist averag unit labour cost growth leav asid recent countri join euro area greec portug ireland particular lost competit visàvi main trade partner euro area germani contrast abl lower relat unit labour cost similar persist loss gain competit unit state state experienc larg persist increas unit labour cost current exceed nation averag much state gain competit visàvi nation averag past decad summari econom heterogen euro area unit state broad similar number measur past year crisi shown us reason complac euro area persist loss competit part individu member currenc union lead buildup extern intern imbal unravel cost affect economi larg also spillov effect member currenc union union econom govern framework need prevent develop individu member state endang smooth function union particular true currenc union contrast unit state larg feder budget balanc sever asymmetr develop emu econom govern framework devis correct implement case prove weak crisi speak today reform debat still progress allow take minut outlin reform requir make europ institut econom govern commensur monetari union may know ecb take strong view need speed automat sanction mechan particular true stabil growth pact eu framework fiscal govern also case broader framework macroeconom polici surveil experi recent month vivid demonstr import time correct intern extern imbal faster automat sanction alon enough enforc tool also need made effect macroeconom surveil framework particular need provid clear incent sound polici member state impos financi sanction earli stage also mean room discret implement surveil framework time requir fiscal macroeconom polici ambiti ensur none euro area member left behind bring nation polici line membership currenc union final implement sound fiscal macroeconom polici best ensur solid anchor nation level effect way achiev implement strong nation budgetari framework member euro area let conclud european union euro area one side atlant unit state side share common heritag cultur natur advanc economi similar size economi also show remark resembl divers among state side atlant among euro area member side true euro area unit state crisi also reaction asymmetr shock crisi therefor common challeng govern best fashion possibl larg similar diversifi economi regard econom featur member countri state natur done us feder institut framework european need reform econom govern framework briefli outlin tonight would well heed word alexand hamilton found father america econom polit union hamilton call fellow american european call leader learn think continent thank attent data us region provision estim publish bureau econom analysi june reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en