Mario Draghi: Introductory remarks at the French Assemblée Nationale,26-06-2013,European Central Bank,ECB,2106,"<p>Presidents,Honourable Members of Parliament,I would like to thank you very warmly for having invited me to address this historic chamber. As President of the European Central Bank, it is an honour to speak in a nation that has done so much to promote and further the cause of European integration.It was exactly 300 years ago, in 1713, that the Abbé de Saint-Pierre presented his Project for Perpetual Peace, one of the first visions for a union between European nations.That this vision emerged into reality is thanks in large part to generations of French thinkers and pioneers, like Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Victor Hugo, and Aristide Briand. It is also thanks to the makers of the modern European Union like Robert Schuman, Jean Monnet, and Jacques Delors. In other words, this country has played a key role in building the peaceful, open and united Europe we see today.But as you know, the EU, and the euro area in particular, is faced with important questions about its direction. It needs a new consensus on how to move forward. I am confident that France will again play a key role in that process.In my introductory remarks today, I would like to focus on three topics: the ECB’s monetary policy, growth and adjustment in the euro area, and the progress towards building a deeper economic and monetary union.I am here today to present the ECB’s views, but also to listen and to learn. I look forward to hearing your opinions and taking your questions. Let me begin with the ECB’s monetary policy.The ECB’s mandate is to maintain price stability, which is essential to support long-term growth, defend citizens’ purchasing power and maintain sustainable and high employment. In order to deliver our mandate, the ECB has done a great deal to support the euro area economy. First, we have reduced our main interest rate to the historic low of 0.5%.Second, we have introduced a series of measures to ensure that banks can pass on these low interest rates to borrowers in the real economy. These measures include allowing banks to borrow as much liquidity from the ECB as they need; expanding the range of collateral they can use to access that liquidity; intervening in bond markets that were malfunctioning, like the sovereign bond market or the covered bond market; and launching two three-year Long-Term Refinancing Operations (LTROs), which injected more than 1 trillion euro into the euro area banking system.Overall, our balance sheet increased from just below 1.5 trillion euro before the crisis to more than 3 trillion euro at its peak.Our measures are primarily focused on banks because, in the euro area, bank lending is the main channel through which firms and households get access to finance. Around three quarters of firms’ external financing comes from banks, compared with only around one quarter in the United States. Supporting the banking system is therefore essential to support growth in the euro area – and to fulfil our mandate to maintain price stability.More recently, the ECB has acted to remove unfounded fears about the future integrity of our monetary union. These fears were creating severe turbulence in financial markets and preventing our low interest rates from reaching the countries where they were needed most. As a result, we saw a risk of a widespread credit crunch in these countries. Questions over fiscal sustainability and growing market distrust were starting to spill over into their respective banking sectors. The effects for growth and employment would have been severe. Indeed, investors were suddenly losing confidence that the euro area could survive in its current composition. The prospect that claims on governments and private companies in certain countries could not be discharged in euros had become a possibility. Our response was to introduce the programme of Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT), which allows for ex ante unlimited interventions in sovereign debt markets. OMT has been effective in restoring market functioning and trust in the euro area. For example, since the OMT announcement, bond markets have steadied, providing discipline without becoming destructive. Spreads on long-term bonds for Spain, Italy and Ireland have declined by around 150-250 basis points, and for Portugal by almost 500 basis points.And this has helped reduce financial fragmentation within the euro area, as shown by the best indicator we have for fragmentation, the level of Target balances. These have declined by 285 billion euros, or 25%, since the peak last year. France, like all other member states, has benefited significantly from this stabilisation. In short, the ECB has been very active in responding to the crisis. We have robustly defended the stability of our monetary union and therefore of our money. And we stand ready to act again when needed. However, it is important to acknowledge that there are limits to what monetary policy can achieve. This is not a question of the scope of our mandate. It is fundamentally about what different institutions are empowered to do.One pertinent example is the current shortage of credit for many households and small- and medium-sized enterprises. Credit provision requires funding, capital and a positive risk assessment. The central bank can help ensure funding and address macroeconomic risk. But it cannot provide capital, nor can it affect banks’ assessment of the creditworthiness of individual borrowers. Similarly, monetary policy cannot create real economic growth. If growth is stalling because the economy is not producing enough or because firms have lost competitiveness, this is beyond the power of the central bank to fix.Yet, the euro area needs sustainable growth. There are currently more than 19 million people unemployed in the euro area. Almost a quarter of young people are out of work. Such high levels of joblessness are a tragedy.Moreover, a weak economy means fewer taxpayers and lower revenues. This puts pressure on public finances, and ultimately on our social models.So what is the best way to achieve the growth Europe needs? Let me turn to this issue now and share with you some reflections on this subject.Some euro area countries have in the past relied on debt to support growth and fund social spending. But this path has led them to a difficult situation today. They have ended up with high public debts while growth has steadily fallen.In this country, for instance, public debt has risen from around 20% of GDP in 1980 to over 90% of GDP today. In that time, annual GDP growth averaged 2.3% in the 1980s, 1.9% in the 1990s, and 1.8% in the 2000s up to the crisis. This suggests that, for all euro area countries, a new approach is needed. An approach that can deliver growth and jobs, and sustain social models, without creating an unsustainable debt burden for future generations. In my view, this requires two complementary responses.The first response is to ensure that fiscal consolidation, which is necessary to contain debt levels, is made as growth-friendly as possible.For instance, relying less on tax increases would help sustain citizens’ disposable income. Prioritising capital investment over current spending would do more to lay the foundations for future growth.Structural fiscal reforms, for example to pension systems, would also help support fiscal sustainability without negative effects on the economy today.The second response is to raise competitiveness and increase the underlying productive capacity of our economies. Here, the frontier is reforms that target the structure of the economy. These include reducing barriers to entry for new firms and young people, and removing burdens on business like complex tax and labour laws or distortionary regulations. Reforms to the labour market are also essential to create the highest possible opportunities for employment.We are already seeing progress on rebalancing in the euro area: unit labour costs are coming down in countries where they had grown excessively; current account deficits are narrowing where there had been large imbalances in the past; and export growth is generally picking up in countries under strain. But in many euro area countries, the gap the between wages and productivity is still out of line with competitiveness. To increase employment, this gap should be closed and all the many policy levers that can contribute to this should be used. Changes to two-tier employment systems that protect insiders and harm outsiders are one such lever. Let us not forget that those who suffer the most from unreformed labour markets are often young people, as evidenced by the very high levels of youth employment today. I therefore welcome the joint initiative of the French and German Labour ministers to tackle this issue.This underscores an important point about reforms: by restoring competitiveness and creating opportunities for a wider range of people, they benefit the many, not the few. Reforms are an expression of solidarity between citizens. Solidarity across countries is also important, but it would be meaningless without solidarity within countries.What role can the euro area as a whole play in supporting growth and stability across Europe?Governments are today reflecting deeply on this question. They are considering what was missing in the original design of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU): what responsibilities need to be shared at the European level, and what not, to make EMU function effectively.In my view, this debate should be driven by a single question: how can we best protect the vital interests of euro area citizens? And where the answer involves transferring sovereignty to the European level, we should not hesitate to do so.The best example of this is Banking Union. Banking Union is essential to ensure that we make permanent the progress made in reintegrating financial markets; that financial conditions in both core and periphery countries return to normal; and that our monetary union becomes truly single again. It has two indispensable elements: a strong Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) and a strong Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM). A strong system of common supervision is key to increase confidence in the health of euro area banks, which has been damaged due to supervisory failures in the past. Progress is already well underway here, and the Single Supervisory Mechanism will take over supervision one year after the legislation is adopted.But to ensure that common supervision is credible, it needs to be accompanied by a mechanism that can wind down failing banks without causing financial instability. This is why we need a Single Resolution Mechanism. And it needs to have a strong European dimension to be able to deal effectively with large, cross-border banks.But Banking Union is not the only example of where closer union is needed. Ultimately, the euro area needs to be drawing closer in all fields of economic policy.The recent call from the leaders of France and Germany for closer economic union shows that this message is being understood. But it is important that form is fully aligned with substance. In my view, a true economic union means three things.First, it means every country ensuring its national economy functions properly, without external imbalances and high unemployment. We cannot have a strong economic union without strong national economies.Second, it means transferring some sovereignty over decision-making to the European level – accepting decisions that are made for the good of the euro area as a whole, even if, at that moment in time, individual countries may disagree with them.Third, it means applying the same rules to all members of monetary union. This is not only a condition of fairness between countries, but also a pre-condition for deeper integration. Only if there is trust that each member will play by the rules can a union of mutual solidarity become possible.For these reasons, moving towards closer economic union also requires an equivalent deepening of political union. Greater authority at the European level must be matched by greater democratic legitimacy. And here both the European Parliament and national parliaments have a key role to play.As Herman van Rompuy has reminded us, national parliaments have become EU institutions.Let me now conclude.The euro area has made much progress in recent years, but it still faces many challenges. Solving them requires EU institutions and national governments to work in concert. The ECB has done as much as it can to stabilise markets and support the economy. Now governments and parliaments need to do all they can to raise growth potential, strengthen competitiveness and build a stronger, more stable EMU.I was impressed to learn that, back in 1871, Victor Hugo called in this Assembly for a United States of Europe. France today can be equally ambitious in taking the euro area forward.Thank you for your attention.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",presid honour member parliament would like thank warm invit address histor chamber presid european central bank honour speak nation done much promot caus european integr exact year ago abbé de saintpierr present project perpetu peac one first vision union european nation vision emerg realiti thank larg part generat french thinker pioneer like jeanjacqu rousseau victor hugo aristid briand also thank maker modern european union like robert schuman jean monnet jacqu delor word countri play key role build peac open unit europ see today know eu euro area particular face import question direct need new consensus move forward confid franc play key role process introductori remark today would like focus three topic ecb monetari polici growth adjust euro area progress toward build deeper econom monetari union today present ecb view also listen learn look forward hear opinion take question let begin ecb monetari polici ecb mandat maintain price stabil essenti support longterm growth defend citizen purchas power maintain sustain high employ order deliv mandat ecb done great deal support euro area economi first reduc main interest rate histor low second introduc seri measur ensur bank pass low interest rate borrow real economi measur includ allow bank borrow much liquid ecb need expand rang collater use access liquid interven bond market malfunct like sovereign bond market cover bond market launch two threeyear longterm refinanc oper ltros inject trillion euro euro area bank system overal balanc sheet increas trillion euro crisi trillion euro peak measur primarili focus bank euro area bank lend main channel firm household get access financ around three quarter firm extern financ come bank compar around one quarter unit state support bank system therefor essenti support growth euro area fulfil mandat maintain price stabil recent ecb act remov unfound fear futur integr monetari union fear creat sever turbul financi market prevent low interest rate reach countri need result saw risk widespread credit crunch countri question fiscal sustain grow market distrust start spill respect bank sector effect growth employ would sever inde investor sudden lose confid euro area could surviv current composit prospect claim govern privat compani certain countri could discharg euro becom possibl respons introduc programm outright monetari transact omt allow ex ant unlimit intervent sovereign debt market omt effect restor market function trust euro area exampl sinc omt announc bond market steadi provid disciplin without becom destruct spread longterm bond spain itali ireland declin around basi point portug almost basi point help reduc financi fragment within euro area shown best indic fragment level target balanc declin billion euro sinc peak last year franc like member state benefit signific stabilis short ecb activ respond crisi robust defend stabil monetari union therefor money stand readi act need howev import acknowledg limit monetari polici achiev question scope mandat fundament differ institut empow one pertin exampl current shortag credit mani household small mediums enterpris credit provis requir fund capit posit risk assess central bank help ensur fund address macroeconom risk cannot provid capit affect bank assess creditworthi individu borrow similar monetari polici cannot creat real econom growth growth stall economi produc enough firm lost competit beyond power central bank fix yet euro area need sustain growth current million peopl unemploy euro area almost quarter young peopl work high level jobless tragedi moreov weak economi mean fewer taxpay lower revenu put pressur public financ ultim social model best way achiev growth europ need let turn issu share reflect subject euro area countri past reli debt support growth fund social spend path led difficult situat today end high public debt growth steadili fallen countri instanc public debt risen around gdp gdp today time annual gdp growth averag crisi suggest euro area countri new approach need approach deliv growth job sustain social model without creat unsustain debt burden futur generat view requir two complementari respons first respons ensur fiscal consolid necessari contain debt level made growthfriend possibl instanc reli less tax increas would help sustain citizen dispos incom prioritis capit invest current spend would lay foundat futur growth structur fiscal reform exampl pension system would also help support fiscal sustain without negat effect economi today second respons rais competit increas under product capac economi frontier reform target structur economi includ reduc barrier entri new firm young peopl remov burden busi like complex tax labour law distortionari regul reform labour market also essenti creat highest possibl opportun employ alreadi see progress rebalanc euro area unit labour cost come countri grown excess current account deficit narrow larg imbal past export growth general pick countri strain mani euro area countri gap wage product still line competit increas employ gap close mani polici lever contribut use chang twotier employ system protect insid harm outsid one lever let us forget suffer unreform labour market often young peopl evidenc high level youth employ today therefor welcom joint initi french german labour minist tackl issu underscor import point reform restor competit creat opportun wider rang peopl benefit mani reform express solidar citizen solidar across countri also import would meaningless without solidar within countri role euro area whole play support growth stabil across europ govern today reflect deepli question consid miss origin design econom monetari union emu respons need share european level make emu function effect view debat driven singl question best protect vital interest euro area citizen answer involv transfer sovereignti european level hesit best exampl bank union bank union essenti ensur make perman progress made reintegr financi market financi condit core peripheri countri return normal monetari union becom truli singl two indispens element strong singl supervisori mechan ssm strong singl resolut mechan srm strong system common supervis key increas confid health euro area bank damag due supervisori failur past progress alreadi well underway singl supervisori mechan take supervis one year legisl adopt ensur common supervis credibl need accompani mechan wind fail bank without caus financi instabl need singl resolut mechan need strong european dimens abl deal effect larg crossbord bank bank union exampl closer union need ultim euro area need draw closer field econom polici recent call leader franc germani closer econom union show messag understood import form fulli align substanc view true econom union mean three thing first mean everi countri ensur nation economi function proper without extern imbal high unemploy cannot strong econom union without strong nation economi second mean transfer sovereignti decisionmak european level accept decis made good euro area whole even moment time individu countri may disagre third mean appli rule member monetari union condit fair countri also precondit deeper integr trust member play rule union mutual solidar becom possibl reason move toward closer econom union also requir equival deepen polit union greater author european level must match greater democrat legitimaci european parliament nation parliament key role play herman van rompuy remind us nation parliament becom eu institut let conclud euro area made much progress recent year still face mani challeng solv requir eu institut nation govern work concert ecb done much stabilis market support economi govern parliament need rais growth potenti strengthen competit build stronger stabl emu impress learn back victor hugo call assembl unit state europ franc today equal ambiti take euro area forward thank attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en