Jean-Claude Trichet: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament,29-08-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,993,"<p>Dear Madam Chair,Dear Honourable Members,Thank you very much for the invitation to the exchange of views today. You asked me to begin with a brief overview of the main recent economic and monetary developments in the euro area and recent monetary policy decisions. Incoming information since our last regular hearing in June continue to point towards ongoing growth in the euro area, although – as expected – at a slower pace. After a strong increase of 0.8% quarter-on-quarter in the first quarter of 2011, partly due to special factors, real GDP growth decelerated to 0.2% quarter-on-quarter in the second quarter. Looking ahead, we continue to see the euro area economy growing at a modest pace in a context of overall relatively sound economic fundamentals for the euro area as a whole. At the same time, not least because of the recently re-emerged tensions in financial markets, uncertainty remains particularly high. This mainly relates to ongoing fiscal and economic adjustment in a number of euro area countries and most other advanced economies, as well as the overall outlook for the global economy. In particular, the United States has been facing both fiscal and structural headwinds amidst weakened economic prospects. Inflation in the euro area has remained elevated for some months, mainly driven by commodity prices. We expect to see inflation still above 2% over the months ahead. Risks to the medium-term outlook for price developments are under study in the context of the ECB staff projections that will be released early September.Our monetary analysis indicates that the underlying pace of monetary expansion remains moderate but monetary liquidity remains ample, with the potential to accommodate price pressures. At the same time, monetary liquidity is likely to be held more for precautionary reasons rather than for spending purposes.The Governing Council of the ECB is determined to ensure that inflation expectations continue to be firmly anchored in line with our aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Let me turn to our response to the deterioration in financial markets in the second half of July and early August in the euro area and elsewhere. Notably, in the euro area the renewed intensification of financial market turbulence led to very high interest rates, potentially damaging volatility and very low trading volumes in some government bond markets that at times ceased to function appropriately. The tensions to some extent resembled those observed in May 2010, but in some aspects they were more broad-based than what we had seen at that time. In view of these developments, the ECB decided earlier this month to continue conducting its refinancing operations as fixed-rate tender procedures with full allotment, at least until mid-January 2012. ‘Full allotment’ means that the Eurosystem fulfils, against collateral, in full the liquidity demands by any participating bank in our refinancing operations. Currently, the outstanding Eurosystem credit in our refinancing operations amounts to about € 530 billion, which is provided in operations ranging from 1 week to 6 months. We decided in early August to conduct one refinancing operation with a maturity of approximately six months to help banks in their liquidity planning, and enhance support for their lending to households and corporations. Currently about 470 banks participate as counterparts in our refinancing operations; and over 6,000 banks are potentially eligible. The total value of marketable securities eligible for Eurosystem credit operations is about € 14,000 billion (as of 31 December 2010; source: ECB Annual Report). Therefore, there is no liquidity or collateral shortage for the European banking system. The ECB resumed government bond market interventions within its Securities Markets Programme (SMP) in August. Via its securities interventions, the ECB Governing Council aims at helping to restore a more appropriate transmission of its monetary policy stance in an environment in which some market segments are dysfunctional. The interventions do not influence our monetary policy stance. In order to sterilise the impact of these interventions on the liquidity conditions in the banking system, we re-absorb the liquidity injected. On the broader context of this programme, let me quote what I said in May 2010 [1]: ""Our actions are in full compliance with the prohibition of monetary financing and thus with our financial independence. The Treaty prohibits the direct purchase by the ECB of debt instruments from governments. We are buying bonds on the secondary market only, and we stick to the principles of the Treaty, which are price stability, our primary mandate, and central bank independence. We expect from governments strict respect for the principle of budgetary discipline and effective mutual surveillance. The purchases made on the secondary market cannot be used to circumvent the fundamental principle of budgetary discipline. The Securities Markets Programme strictly aims at correcting malfunctioning of markets.The prohibition of monetary financing underlines precisely the fact that budgetary discipline is of the utmost importance. We have taken note of the precise additional commitments taken by some euro area governments to accelerate fiscal consolidation and to ensure the sustainability of their public finances."" I have nothing to withdraw from these remarks of May 2010. They remain fully valid. We expect from governments strict respect for the principle of budgetary discipline and effective mutual surveillance. It is of utmost importance that these commitments are now implemented strictly and timely. They need to be backed by concrete measures. This applies to both the IMF/EU adjustment programmes and the renewed commitment of all euro area governments to the agreed fiscal targets. The full and timely implementation of the 21 July agreement between Heads of State or Government is of essence in this respect. While a special arrangement for Greece has been launched, the inflexible determination of all other euro area governments to fully honour their own individual sovereign signature is key in returning to sustainable and healthy public finances and contribute to stable market conditions. Thank you for your attention.[1]Speech on ""The ECB’s response to the recent tensions in financial markets"", Economic Conference of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, Vienna, 31 May 2010.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",dear madam chair dear honour member thank much invit exchang view today ask begin brief overview main recent econom monetari develop euro area recent monetari polici decis incom inform sinc last regular hear june continu point toward ongo growth euro area although expect slower pace strong increas quarteronquart first quarter part due special factor real gdp growth deceler quarteronquart second quarter look ahead continu see euro area economi grow modest pace context overal relat sound econom fundament euro area whole time least recent reemerg tension financi market uncertainti remain particular high main relat ongo fiscal econom adjust number euro area countri advanc economi well overal outlook global economi particular unit state face fiscal structur headwind amidst weaken econom prospect inflat euro area remain elev month main driven commod price expect see inflat still month ahead risk mediumterm outlook price develop studi context ecb staff project releas earli septemb monetari analysi indic under pace monetari expans remain moder monetari liquid remain ampl potenti accommod price pressur time monetari liquid like held precautionari reason rather spend purpos govern council ecb determin ensur inflat expect continu firm anchor line aim keep inflat rate close medium term let turn respons deterior financi market second half juli earli august euro area elsewher notabl euro area renew intensif financi market turbul led high interest rate potenti damag volatil low trade volum govern bond market time ceas function appropri tension extent resembl observ may aspect broadbas seen time view develop ecb decid earlier month continu conduct refinanc oper fixedr tender procedur full allot least midjanuari full allot mean eurosystem fulfil collater full liquid demand particip bank refinanc oper current outstand eurosystem credit refinanc oper amount billion provid oper rang week month decid earli august conduct one refinanc oper matur approxim six month help bank liquid plan enhanc support lend household corpor current bank particip counterpart refinanc oper bank potenti elig total valu market secur elig eurosystem credit oper billion decemb sourc ecb annual report therefor liquid collater shortag european bank system ecb resum govern bond market intervent within secur market programm smp august via secur intervent ecb govern council aim help restor appropri transmiss monetari polici stanc environ market segment dysfunct intervent influenc monetari polici stanc order sterilis impact intervent liquid condit bank system reabsorb liquid inject broader context programm let quot said may action full complianc prohibit monetari financ thus financi independ treati prohibit direct purchas ecb debt instrument govern buy bond secondari market stick principl treati price stabil primari mandat central bank independ expect govern strict respect principl budgetari disciplin effect mutual surveil purchas made secondari market cannot use circumv fundament principl budgetari disciplin secur market programm strict aim correct malfunct market prohibit monetari financ underlin precis fact budgetari disciplin utmost import taken note precis addit commit taken euro area govern acceler fiscal consolid ensur sustain public financ noth withdraw remark may remain fulli valid expect govern strict respect principl budgetari disciplin effect mutual surveil utmost import commit implement strict time need back concret measur appli imfeu adjust programm renew commit euro area govern agre fiscal target full time implement juli agreement head state govern essenc respect special arrang greec launch inflex determin euro area govern fulli honour individu sovereign signatur key return sustain healthi public financ contribut stabl market condit thank attent speech ecb respons recent tension financi market econom confer oesterreichisch nationalbank vienna may reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en