Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The Triffin dilemma revisited,03-10-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,4216,"<p>The intellectual heritage of Robert Triffin begins with the relevance of his “dilemma” to our days. We still have a situation in which one national currency – the US dollar – serves as the main international currency. It remains at the heart of the international monetary and financial system (or IMS). And we still have a fundamental tension between the currency demands of rapidly growing economies, the domestic policy incentives of reserve issuing/holding countries, and global economic and financial stability: in Triffin’s words, the system remains “highly dependent on individual countries’ decisions”. This tension – the Triffin dilemma – was linked to the specific modalities of the gold-exchange standard in 1960, when his Gold and the dollar crisis was first published. Today we are in a much more flexible system, where the demand for global liquidity can be more easily accommodated. But even if the mechanics have changed, the dilemma is still valid if we capture its essence and formulate it in broader terms, as I will do in the first part of my comments today. In second place, I will briefly recall how the dilemma came into being and was addressed in Triffin’s times. This will allow me to better identify the main differences and similarities compared with our times, which will lead me to conclude that it is indeed correct to talk about a “Triffin dilemma revisited”. Finally, I will look ahead and ask whether and how it is possible to escape the dilemma today. My main policy conclusion is that we need a number of incentives for the major reserve issuers and holders so as not to cause negative externalities for other countries, thereby helping to ensure global stability.Each international monetary and financial system has to rely on one or more international currencies in order to allow economic agents to interact in the global economy by using such currencies as a means of payment, a unit of account or a store of value. When these international currencies are also domestic ones, the supply of global liquidity stems from one or more “core countries”. And when the core countries operate as a monopoly or quasi-monopoly, over time they tend to take advantage of other countries’ high dependence on their domestic money. By exploiting this “exorbitant privilege”, the core countries develop policy incentives to accommodate shocks (e.g. the financing of a war) or growth models (e.g. based on over-consumption) that can ultimately be sustained only if the rest of the world unconditionally demands their own liquid, safe assets. However, when policies become too short term-oriented and inward-looking, they tend to produce negative spillovers on the rest of the world (e.g. inflationary pressures or an environment with relatively low yields) and over the longer run may, if there are no rebalancing measures, prove unsustainable and impair the smooth functioning of the IMS. For some time (or even a very long time), however, this behaviour does not jeopardise the international status of the core currencies. This is not only because there are no alternatives, but also because certain systemic countries in the rest of the world have in the meantime developed incentives to increasingly demand assets denominated in the core currencies. Such countries in the “IMS periphery” tend to pursue growth models that match, with opposite sign, those of the core countries and may likewise produce negative externalities: think of the current account surpluses and reserve accumulation, which conflicted with the IMS rules during Bretton Woods times and which contribute to excessively low yields and trade distortions at the present time. Hence the tension, which can sooner or later become a genuine dilemma involving short-term domestic policy incentives in the key reserve issuing/holding countries on the one hand, and the longer-term stability of a given international monetary and financial system on the other. Given this general formulation, however, there is no single way to address the tension here. And indeed many different types of IMS have existed over time. In Triffin’s day, some set stringent rules on the system’s adjustment and on the availability of global liquidity, as I will recount in a minute. Others, as at present, have instead made it easier to create global liquidity and to finance imbalances while neglecting the system’s longer-term stability – an issue which I will discuss later. During the Bretton Woods system, the dollar was the international currency, and the international currency was mainly needed as a means of payment and a unit of account to purchase foreign goods. Given largely closed capital accounts and underdeveloped financial markets, the store of value function was limited, and mainly related to the need to cover any temporary shortage of dollars to import goods from abroad. The other key features of the system were fixed exchange rates vis-à-vis the dollar, the gold convertibility of the dollar, and a mechanism of adjustment of imbalances based on a symmetrical correction of domestic absorption and relative prices in the relevant countries. However, there was no mechanism to impose symmetry in the adjustment process, and adjustment through exchange rate realignments was possible, although it rarely happened.When the Bretton Woods system was launched, in the second half of the 1940s, the huge economic gap with the United States made it difficult for other countries to acquire dollars without US help. By the end of the 1950s, however, the global shortage of dollars was over, thanks to rising dollar-denominated exports. This was welcomed since it implied that countries no longer needed American assistance to obtain dollars in order to address post-war economic problems. Yet it was not entirely good news, as Triffin realised. Countries such as Germany and Japan had indeed started accumulating large current account surpluses and, therefore, dollars in the form of rising official reserves. This implied an accumulation of US monetary liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents. The problem was that the supply of such liabilities by the United States at a fixed exchange rate was elastic to the growing demand, but the American commitment to supply gold upon request at an equally fixed price was not. [2] Already by the early 1960s, US monetary liabilities towards non-residents exceeded US gold holdings. Hence the dilemma, which in Triffin’s day took the well-known, specific shape: if the United States refused to provide other countries with US dollars, trade would stagnate and the world economy would eventually be trapped in a deflationary bias; but if the United States provided an unlimited supply of dollars, the confidence that it would convert them into gold would erode confidence in its international currency [3].The dilemma could, however, be formulated in more general terms. Given the BW rules, there were domestic policy incentives in the key reserve-issuing and holding countries not to comply with these rules, at the expense of the system’s sustainability. This is mainly because using the exchange rate as an alternative rebalancing tool was always a temptation which, especially in case of large shocks, offered a politically more palatable option than lengthy and costly domestic adjustment. At the end of the 1960s, the largest of all shocks – the Vietnam War – was financed by the United States with expansionary policies that resulted in high inflationary pressures and took no account of global monetary stability. As a result, the US dollar-denominated reserve assets lost 40% of their purchasing power, thus making the creditors to the United States increasingly reluctant to finance the war by accumulating reserves denominated in dollars. The system eventually collapsed, as Triffin had predicted: faced with the dilemma, the system’s core country preferred not to maintain its commitment to keep the value of the dollar in terms of gold, but rather to pursue its internal needs while providing the other countries (which were not adjusting either) with its reserve currency.What has changed since Triffin’s times? Well, the way in which the IMS works and thus the modalities through which the dilemma operates have changed considerably; but the fundamental tension between short-term domestic policy incentives and the stability of the IMS has not. Hence the Triffin dilemma is, in its essence, still alive and well.There have been three major changes.First, we have learned that the BW rules were too stringent. Over the past 40 years, a new informal IMS has been developing which has turned out to be much more elastic in nature than the previous ones. The dollar no longer needs to be “as good as gold”; exchange rate adjustment has become an important element in the rebalancing toolkit; and the IMS has been adapting to the different economic conditions and policy preferences of individual countries. In particular, the exchange rates of all advanced economies and some emerging economies are now freely floating, whereas a new dollar area encompassing systemically relevant creditors has emerged, thus making the IMS an hybrid floating/fixed system. Second, a new globally important currency, the euro, has appeared on the stage. This has had important consequences, but has not meant a shift to a genuine duopoly in the supply of international currencies. While the euro has become a credible alternative to the dollar, this has had little impact on the dollar’s centrality in the IMS. In particular, the exorbitant privilege remains largely the dollar’s attribute. To be sure, it is undeniable that the very low yield spreads associated, until approximately 2008, with the debt of certain European countries were mainly a by-product of the “privilege” of being part of the euro area. And it is also true that this was one of the factors that contributed to underestimating the crucial importance of fiscal discipline and competitiveness in the monetary union. But it is equally accurate that the idiosyncratic negative shocks stemming from such euro area countries in the past two years have led to a major re-pricing of their sovereign risk. This is opposite of what has happened on the occasion of similar negative shocks originating from the United States. The current stability of the exchange rate of the euro is more attributable to the overall good fundamentals of the whole euro area than to any exorbitant privilege.But the third and most significant change, from a Triffin perspective, is the following: there is no longer a fundamental global liquidity [4] shortage that is intrinsic to the very functioning of the system. The accumulation of global external imbalances in today’s world should not be seen as a necessary precondition for the provision of global liquidity and the expansion of world trade. Let me explain.Today, the United States and the euro area are not obliged to run rising current account deficits to meet the demand for dollars or euros [5]. This is for two main, interlinked reasons. First, well-functioning, more liquid and deeply integrated global financial markets enable reserve-issuing countries to provide the rest of the world with safe and liquid financial liabilities while investing a corresponding amount in a wide range of financial assets abroad. The euro has indeed become an important international currency since its inception and the euro area has been running a balanced current account. In a world where there is no longer a one-to-one link between current accounts, i.e. net capital flows and global liquidity, a proper understanding of global liquidity also needs to include gross capital flows. Second, under BW global liquidity and official liquidity [6] were basically the same thing, but today the “ease of financing” at global level also crucially depends on private liquidity directly provided by financial institutions, for instance through interbank lending or market making in securities markets. Given the endogenous character of such private liquidity, global official and private liquidity have to be assessed together for a proper evaluation of global liquidity conditions at some point in time, and there is no endemic shortage of global liquidity, as the empirical evidence confirms. This is not to deny that temporary shortages can occur, as happened after the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. But such shortages are a by-product of shocks and boom-bust cycles, not an intrinsic feature of the IMS, and can be tackled with an appropriate global financial safety net.First, there remain factors that create Triffin-dilemma-like pressures on the IMS. In particular, the official sector of several emerging market economies (EMEs) still consistently adds its own demand for safe US assets to the market-based private demand for US dollars. Even when a shock originates from the United States, sizeable and persistent official capital flows to that country seek out the dollar as a safe store of value and a precautionary source of liquidity. As a result, total net capital stemming from EMEs taken as a whole flows uphill to advanced economies (the Lucas paradox), even though private capital continues to flow downhill, as the theory would predict. This would not be a problem if it did not increase the fragility of the US financial system by pushing down risk premia and real interest rates, thereby boosting financial innovation and encouraging upswings in the degree of leverage. [7] But it does increase that fragility. Three core drivers of reserve accumulation can be identified, in particular: 1. A few surplus EMEs buy dollars as a by-product of a strategy aiming to systematically keep their real effective exchange rate undervalued; 2. Other EMEs with largely open capital accounts, which are exposed to capital flow volatility, purchase dollars to build up precautionary reserves in the event of a reversal of capital inflows; 3. The commodity exporters recycle their current account surpluses into safe dollar-denominated assets.As in Triffin’s day, however, this cuts both ways. The demand for safe assets feeds that exorbitant privilege enjoyed by the United States. This contributes to a weakening of US policy discipline as the country tends to excessively rely on easy credit in normal times and very expansionary macroeconomic policies in times of crisis. The outcome is excessive US indebtedness. The corporate sector was in debt prior to the burst of the dot-com bubble in 2001; so were the household and financial sectors before the eruption of the sub-prime crisis in 2007-08; and the official sector is in debt today. This leads me to the second valid element of the Triffin dilemma. The IMS is not in a better situation today. The quandary under the BW system – the lack of a credible anchor for international monetary and financial stability – continues to exist. Key issuers and holders of reserve currencies pursue domestic objectives independently of what would best serve the global system and even their longer-run interest. To the extent that these policies pay insufficient attention to negative externalities for other countries and longer-term macroeconomic and financial stability concerns, they tend to produce unsustainable imbalances and fuel vulnerability in the global financial system. In particular, a large body of literature supports the view that a worldwide glut of both liquidity and planned savings over investment – stemming from, respectively, reserve-issuing and reserve- accumulating economies – was a key driver of the hazardous environment at the root of the global financial and economic crisis which broke out in summer 2007. [8] All in all, as in Triffin’s time, there is no a credible mechanism for symmetric adjustment of imbalances at work today, even though we now have more flexible exchange rates, more financial innovation, more capital mobility and more private international liquidity.In the event, Triffin was proved right not in the strict sense, but in a broader sense. Short-sighted policies that support unsustainable growth models not only tend to fuel the booms that precede financial crises, but may also, over the longer run, undermine the confidence that is the basis for the reserve asset status of one or more national currencies. Even the more flexible IMS of today may therefore, in this sense, prove inherently unstable.To obtain the missing link between the policy discipline of major reserve issuers and holders on the one hand and global stability on the other, we need incentives to prevent them from causing negative externalities. And such incentives can only stem from a mix of i) internationally cooperative policy actions, ii) proper crisis responses and iii) structural developments. First, regarding international cooperation, we have seen significant progress in IMF and regional multilateral surveillance, as well as in G20 mutual policy assessment, in the aftermath of the crisis. Countries have indeed been looking for a platform to exert some influence on those policies of partner countries that were producing negative spillovers – be they fiscal profligacy, lack of financial sector reform, unconstrained reserve accumulation or the reintroduction of capital controls. To obtain this platform, countries have at the same time to allow their partners a platform to influence their own policies. This is the moment when things might start to change. [9] Second, experience suggests that cooperative policies, unfortunately, are not enough, and crises do play a part in producing fundamental changes in the system of policy incentives. For instance, it was not until the euro area sovereign debt crisis that EMU’s economic governance started to be seriously enhanced – and the list of examples is of course very long. Third, not only crises, but also longer-term, largely market-driven structural developments may eventually alter the system of policy incentives. One such development could be, according to some, a shift towards a truly multi-polar currency system. [10] In such an IMS, it is argued, there would be credible alternatives to dollar-denominated investments, which in turn would inevitably enhance policy discipline in the United States. Also, a multi-polar currency world would allow for greater monetary policy autonomy in EMEs such as China, which would thus be in a position to better address their imbalances and overheating pressures. I broadly share the view that a truly multi-polar IMS would imply better policy incentives for stability-oriented policies. But how do we get there? And would a multi-polar currency system be stable, or would a new hegemon eventually emerge, as the United States did in the past century? To deal with possible dollar shortages, Triffin preferred the issuance by a global central bank of a new supranational currency serving as “outside fiat money” and floating against national currencies, which countries would be obliged to accept in international transactions. Wouldn’t this be the best pattern to follow?These questions are very relevant ones, and the responses to them are far from straightforward. Let me, therefore, conclude by just offering a few final thoughts:How do we achieve a truly multi-polar IMS? The role of further financial market development, capital account liberalisation and exchange rate flexibility in EMEs is often underestimated in this context. The more progress EMEs make in this direction, the lower their official capital outflows to advanced economies will be. This would progressively reduce the demand for safe debt instruments issued by advanced economies and eventually contribute to greater financial stability worldwide [11]. It would also allow a better channelling of domestic credit to investment and consumption, which in turn would promote growth driven by domestic demand, thereby reducing the incentive to pursue export-led models based on undervalued exchange rates. Such a process would probably be, by its very nature, gradual and driven by a myriad of autonomous and independent decisions by private and official actors. Hopefully this would make possible an orderly transition towards a multi-polar IMS, with the dollar still remaining “first among equals” for a long time. But in the meantime, a lot will, of course, depend on the ability of policy-makers to take the right decisions. Would a multi-polar IMS be a stable one? Greater symmetry in financial globalisation would certainly go in this direction. But would economic weight and policy credibility – the other key ingredients for a currency to acquire an international status and start enjoying incumbency advantages – also materialise in such a way that there would be a sufficient number of currency competitors around the table? Once again, the response is to a significant extent in the hands of today’s policy-makers.Finally, would not a bancor-based IMS, as Keynes was hoping for in the 1940s and Triffin in the 1960s, be the best response? This type of solution had very few advocates in the 1960s – an attitude that has hardly changed 50 years later. I remain very sceptical about the bancor proposal, and not only because of its doubtful feasibility. Indeed, some have said that a supranational currency would need to be kept strong in order not to depreciate against the other major existing currencies. Any weakening would undermine its attractiveness, and hence its function as a reserve asset. However, if the supply of a supranational currency were to be restricted, it might fail to meet demand and so fall short of its function. [12] As you can see, it is unclear even whether a new supranational currency could solve the dilemma once and for all, or whether the dilemma would simply take on a different form. Given such uncertainty, the Triffin International Foundation may well have to organise another conference in the 22nd century!Angeloni, Bénassy-Quéré, Carton, Darvas, Destais, Pisani-Ferry, Sapir and Vallée (2011): “Global currencies for tomorrow: A European perspective”, Bruegel Blueprint Series, vol. XIII.Bernanke, B. (2005), “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit”, Sandridge Lecture delivered to the Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, 10 March. Bini Smaghi, L. (2010b), “Reserve accumulation: the other side of the coin”, speech delivered at the 5th High-level EMEAP-Eurosystem Seminar, Sydney, 10 February.Bini Smaghi, L. (2007), “Global capital and national monetary policies”, speech delivered at the European Economic and Financial Centre, London, 18 January.Borio, C. and Zhu, H. (2008): “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: A missing link in the transmission mechanism?”, BIS Working Paper No. 268 (December).Caballero, R. (2009), “The ‘Other’ Imbalance and the Financial Crisis”, paper for the Baffi Lecture delivered at the Banca d’Italia, 10 December.Caballero, R. and Krishnamurthy, A. (2009), “Global Imbalances and Financial Fragility”, NBER Working Papers, No 14688, National Bureau of Economic Research.Dooley, M.P., Folkerts-Landau, D. and Garber, P. (2003), “An essay on the revived Bretton Woods System”, NBER Working Papers, No 9971, National Bureau of Economic Research, September.Dorrucci, E. and McKay, J. (2011), The International Monetary System after the Financial Crisis, Occasional Paper Series, No 123, ECB, Frankfurt am Mai, February.Eichengreen, B. (2011), Exorbitant Privilege – The Decline of the Dollar and the Future of the International Monetary System, Oxford University Press, January.Gourinchas, P.-O. and Rey, H. (2005), “From World Banker to World Venture Capitalist: US External Adjustment and The Exorbitant Privilege”, CEPR Discussion Papers, No 5220, Centre for Economic Policy Research.Keynes, J.M. (1944), The Collected Writings, Volume XXV: Activities, 1940-44 – Shaping the Post-war World: The Clearing Union, Basingstoke, 1980.Landau, J.-P. (2009), “Some thoughts on the international monetary system”, note presented at the G20 Workshop on the Global Economy –Causes of the Crisis: Key Lessons”, Mumbai, 24-26 May.Mateos y Lago, I., Duttagupta, R. and Goyal, R. (2009), “The Debate on the International Monetary System”, Staff Position Note, No SPN/09/26, IMF, 11 November.Mendoza, E.G., Quadrini, V. and Rios-Rull, J-V. (2007), “Financial Integration, Financial Deepness and Global Imbalances”, NBER Working Papers, No 12909, National Bureau of Economic Research, February.Padoa-Schioppa, T. (2010), “The Ghost of Bancor: The Economic Crisis and Global Monetary Disorder”, speech delivered at Louvain-la-Neuve, 25 February. Rajan, R.G. (2010), Fault Lines – How Hidden Fractures Still Threaten the Global Economy”, Princeton University Press.Triffin, R. (1960): “Gold and the dollar crisis”, Yale University Press, New Haven.Warnock, F. and Warnock, V. (2007), “International capital flows and U.S. interest rates”, Journal of International Money and Finance.Zhou, X. (2009), “Reform of the International Monetary System”, essay posted on the website of the People’s Bank of China, 9 April. http://www.pbc.gov.cn/english/detail.asp?col=6500&id=178 .[1]I wish to thank Ettore Dorrucci for his contribution to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.[2]See, for example, Eichengreen 2011.[3]See Triffin 1960.[4]Borio and Zhu (2008) insightfully define liquidity is “the ease with which perceptions of value can be turned into purchasing power”.[5]It should be noted that in BW times the United States had managed to keep a sustainable current account position. The U.S. current account indeed recorded surpluses (though declining ones after the onset of the Vietnam war) or, at most, minor deficits over the whole BW period. On the capital account side, this was mirrored by large long-term capital outflows from the United States, especially foreign direct investment (FDI) by American multinationals, which were financed with short-term capital inflows in the form of bank deposits and Treasury bills and bonds. The United States was, therefore, acting as “banker of the world”, and the accumulation of U.S. net long-term foreign assets was reassuring foreign investors (Eichengreen 2011). However, assuming that capital flow restrictions and underdeveloped financial markets elsewhere in the world would have persisted, the country would likely have soon reached a limit in its ability to engage in maturity transformation in the capital account. Triffin’s prediction that the core country would have had to eventually run increasing current account deficits to allow for world trade expansion was, therefore, basically right under the BW rules.[6]Official liquidity can be defined as the amount of funds that is unconditionally available to settle claims through monetary authorities, mainly consisting of central bank money in reserve currencies and foreign exchange reserves.[7]See, for example, Caballero 2009 and Caballero and Krishnamurthy 2009.[8]See Dorrucci and McKay 2011 for a review of such literature.[9]See, for example, Rajan 2010.[10]See, for example, Angeloni et al. 2011.[11]See Bini Smaghi, 2007.[12]See Landau 2009.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",intellectu heritag robert triffin begin relev dilemma day still situat one nation currenc us dollar serv main intern currenc remain heart intern monetari financi system im still fundament tension currenc demand rapid grow economi domest polici incent reserv issuinghold countri global econom financi stabil triffin word system remain high depend individu countri decis tension triffin dilemma link specif modal goldexchang standard gold dollar crisi first publish today much flexibl system demand global liquid easili accommod even mechan chang dilemma still valid captur essenc formul broader term first part comment today second place briefli recal dilemma came address triffin time allow better identifi main differ similar compar time lead conclud inde correct talk triffin dilemma revisit final look ahead ask whether possibl escap dilemma today main polici conclus need number incent major reserv issuer holder caus negat extern countri therebi help ensur global stabil intern monetari financi system reli one intern currenc order allow econom agent interact global economi use currenc mean payment unit account store valu intern currenc also domest one suppli global liquid stem one core countri core countri oper monopoli quasimonopoli time tend take advantag countri high depend domest money exploit exorbit privileg core countri develop polici incent accommod shock e g financ war growth model e g base overconsumpt ultim sustain rest world uncondit demand liquid safe asset howev polici becom short termori inwardlook tend produc negat spillov rest world e g inflationari pressur environ relat low yield longer run may rebalanc measur prove unsustain impair smooth function im time even long time howev behaviour jeopardis intern status core currenc altern also certain system countri rest world meantim develop incent increas demand asset denomin core currenc countri im peripheri tend pursu growth model match opposit sign core countri may likewis produc negat extern think current account surplus reserv accumul conflict im rule bretton wood time contribut excess low yield trade distort present time henc tension sooner later becom genuin dilemma involv shortterm domest polici incent key reserv issuinghold countri one hand longerterm stabil given intern monetari financi system given general formul howev singl way address tension inde mani differ type im exist time triffin day set stringent rule system adjust avail global liquid recount minut other present instead made easier creat global liquid financ imbal neglect system longerterm stabil issu discuss later bretton wood system dollar intern currenc intern currenc main need mean payment unit account purchas foreign good given larg close capit account underdevelop financi market store valu function limit main relat need cover temporari shortag dollar import good abroad key featur system fix exchang rate visàvi dollar gold convert dollar mechan adjust imbal base symmetr correct domest absorpt relat price relev countri howev mechan impos symmetri adjust process adjust exchang rate realign possibl although rare happen bretton wood system launch second half huge econom gap unit state made difficult countri acquir dollar without us help end howev global shortag dollar thank rise dollardenomin export welcom sinc impli countri longer need american assist obtain dollar order address postwar econom problem yet entir good news triffin realis countri germani japan inde start accumul larg current account surplus therefor dollar form rise offici reserv impli accumul us monetari liabil visàvi nonresid problem suppli liabil unit state fix exchang rate elast grow demand american commit suppli gold upon request equal fix price alreadi earli us monetari liabil toward nonresid exceed us gold hold henc dilemma triffin day took wellknown specif shape unit state refus provid countri us dollar trade would stagnat world economi would eventu trap deflationari bias unit state provid unlimit suppli dollar confid would convert gold would erod confid intern currenc dilemma could howev formul general term given bw rule domest polici incent key reserveissu hold countri compli rule expens system sustain main use exchang rate altern rebalanc tool alway temptat especi case larg shock offer polit palat option lengthi cost domest adjust end largest shock vietnam war financ unit state expansionari polici result high inflationari pressur took account global monetari stabil result us dollardenomin reserv asset lost purchas power thus make creditor unit state increas reluct financ war accumul reserv denomin dollar system eventu collaps triffin predict face dilemma system core countri prefer maintain commit keep valu dollar term gold rather pursu intern need provid countri adjust either reserv currenc chang sinc triffin time well way im work thus modal dilemma oper chang consider fundament tension shortterm domest polici incent stabil im henc triffin dilemma essenc still aliv well three major chang first learn bw rule stringent past year new inform im develop turn much elast natur previous one dollar longer need good gold exchang rate adjust becom import element rebalanc toolkit im adapt differ econom condit polici prefer individu countri particular exchang rate advanc economi emerg economi freeli float wherea new dollar area encompass system relev creditor emerg thus make im hybrid floatingfix system second new global import currenc euro appear stage import consequ meant shift genuin duopoli suppli intern currenc euro becom credibl altern dollar littl impact dollar central im particular exorbit privileg remain larg dollar attribut sure undeni low yield spread associ approxim debt certain european countri main byproduct privileg part euro area also true one factor contribut underestim crucial import fiscal disciplin competit monetari union equal accur idiosyncrat negat shock stem euro area countri past two year led major repric sovereign risk opposit happen occas similar negat shock origin unit state current stabil exchang rate euro attribut overal good fundament whole euro area exorbit privileg third signific chang triffin perspect follow longer fundament global liquid shortag intrins function system accumul global extern imbal today world seen necessari precondit provis global liquid expans world trade let explain today unit state euro area oblig run rise current account deficit meet demand dollar euro two main interlink reason first wellfunct liquid deepli integr global financi market enabl reserveissu countri provid rest world safe liquid financi liabil invest correspond amount wide rang financi asset abroad euro inde becom import intern currenc sinc incept euro area run balanc current account world longer onetoon link current account e net capit flow global liquid proper understand global liquid also need includ gross capit flow second bw global liquid offici liquid basic thing today eas financ global level also crucial depend privat liquid direct provid financi institut instanc interbank lend market make secur market given endogen charact privat liquid global offici privat liquid assess togeth proper evalu global liquid condit point time endem shortag global liquid empir evid confirm deni temporari shortag occur happen bankruptci lehman brother septemb shortag byproduct shock boombust cycl intrins featur im tackl appropri global financi safeti net first remain factor creat triffindilemmalik pressur im particular offici sector sever emerg market economi eme still consist add demand safe us asset marketbas privat demand us dollar even shock origin unit state sizeabl persist offici capit flow countri seek dollar safe store valu precautionari sourc liquid result total net capit stem eme taken whole flow uphil advanc economi luca paradox even though privat capit continu flow downhil theori would predict would problem increas fragil us financi system push risk premia real interest rate therebi boost financi innov encourag upsw degre leverag increas fragil three core driver reserv accumul identifi particular surplus eme buy dollar byproduct strategi aim systemat keep real effect exchang rate undervalu eme larg open capit account expos capit flow volatil purchas dollar build precautionari reserv event revers capit inflow commod export recycl current account surplus safe dollardenomin asset triffin day howev cut way demand safe asset feed exorbit privileg enjoy unit state contribut weaken us polici disciplin countri tend excess reli easi credit normal time expansionari macroeconom polici time crisi outcom excess us indebted corpor sector debt prior burst dotcom bubbl household financi sector erupt subprim crisi offici sector debt today lead second valid element triffin dilemma im better situat today quandari bw system lack credibl anchor intern monetari financi stabil continu exist key issuer holder reserv currenc pursu domest object independ would best serv global system even longerrun interest extent polici pay insuffici attent negat extern countri longerterm macroeconom financi stabil concern tend produc unsustain imbal fuel vulner global financi system particular larg bodi literatur support view worldwid glut liquid plan save invest stem respect reserveissu reserv accumul economi key driver hazard environ root global financi econom crisi broke summer triffin time credibl mechan symmetr adjust imbal work today even though flexibl exchang rate financi innov capit mobil privat intern liquid event triffin prove right strict sens broader sens shortsight polici support unsustain growth model tend fuel boom preced financi crise may also longer run undermin confid basi reserv asset status one nation currenc even flexibl im today may therefor sens prove inher unstabl obtain miss link polici disciplin major reserv issuer holder one hand global stabil need incent prevent caus negat extern incent stem mix intern cooper polici action ii proper crisi respons iii structur develop first regard intern cooper seen signific progress imf region multilater surveil well g mutual polici assess aftermath crisi countri inde look platform exert influenc polici partner countri produc negat spillov fiscal profligaci lack financi sector reform unconstrain reserv accumul reintroduct capit control obtain platform countri time allow partner platform influenc polici moment thing might start chang second experi suggest cooper polici unfortun enough crise play part produc fundament chang system polici incent instanc euro area sovereign debt crisi emu econom govern start serious enhanc list exampl cours long third crise also longerterm larg marketdriven structur develop may eventu alter system polici incent one develop could accord shift toward truli multipolar currenc system im argu would credibl altern dollardenomin invest turn would inevit enhanc polici disciplin unit state also multipolar currenc world would allow greater monetari polici autonomi eme china would thus posit better address imbal overh pressur broad share view truli multipolar im would impli better polici incent stabilityori polici get would multipolar currenc system stabl would new hegemon eventu emerg unit state past centuri deal possibl dollar shortag triffin prefer issuanc global central bank new supran currenc serv outsid fiat money float nation currenc countri would oblig accept intern transact wouldn best pattern follow question relev one respons far straightforward let therefor conclud offer final thought achiev truli multipolar im role financi market develop capit account liberalis exchang rate flexibl eme often underestim context progress eme make direct lower offici capit outflow advanc economi would progress reduc demand safe debt instrument issu advanc economi eventu contribut greater financi stabil worldwid would also allow better channel domest credit invest consumpt turn would promot growth driven domest demand therebi reduc incent pursu exportl model base undervalu exchang rate process would probabl natur gradual driven myriad autonom independ decis privat offici actor hope would make possibl order transit toward multipolar im dollar still remain first among equal long time meantim lot cours depend abil policymak take right decis would multipolar im stabl one greater symmetri financi globalis would certain go direct would econom weight polici credibl key ingredi currenc acquir intern status start enjoy incumb advantag also materialis way would suffici number currenc competitor around tabl respons signific extent hand today policymak final would bancorbas im keyn hope triffin best respons type solut advoc attitud hard chang year later remain sceptic bancor propos doubt feasibl inde said supran currenc would need kept strong order depreci major exist currenc weaken would undermin attract henc function reserv asset howev suppli supran currenc restrict might fail meet demand fall short function see unclear even whether new supran currenc could solv dilemma whether dilemma would simpli take differ form given uncertainti triffin intern foundat may well organis anoth confer nd centuri angeloni bénassyquéré carton darva destai pisaniferri sapir vallé global currenc tomorrow european perspect bruegel blueprint seri vol xiii bernank b global save glut u current account deficit sandridg lectur deliv virginia associ economist richmond march bini smaghi l b reserv accumul side coin speech deliv th highlevel emeapeurosystem seminar sydney februari bini smaghi l global capit nation monetari polici speech deliv european econom financi centr london januari borio c zhu h capit regul risktak monetari polici miss link transmiss mechan bis work paper decemb caballero r imbal financi crisi paper baffi lectur deliv banca d italia decemb caballero r krishnamurthi global imbal financi fragil nber work paper nation bureau econom research dooley m p folkertslandau d garber p essay reviv bretton wood system nber work paper nation bureau econom research septemb dorrucci e mckay j intern monetari system financi crisi occasion paper seri ecb frankfurt mai februari eichengreen b exorbit privileg declin dollar futur intern monetari system oxford univers press januari gourincha p o rey h world banker world ventur capitalist us extern adjust exorbit privileg cepr discuss paper centr econom polici research keyn j m collect write volum xxv activ shape postwar world clear union basingstok landau j p thought intern monetari system note present g workshop global economi caus crisi key lesson mumbai may mateo y lago duttagupta r goyal r debat intern monetari system staff posit note spn imf novemb mendoza e g quadrini v riosrul jv financi integr financi deep global imbal nber work paper nation bureau econom research februari padoaschioppa ghost bancor econom crisi global monetari disord speech deliv louvainlaneuv februari rajan r g fault line hidden fractur still threaten global economi princeton univers press triffin r gold dollar crisi yale univers press new haven warnock f warnock v intern capit flow u interest rate journal intern money financ zhou x reform intern monetari system essay post websit peopl bank china april http www pbc gov cnenglishdetail asp col id wish thank ettor dorrucci contribut speech remain sole respons opinion contain herein see exampl eichengreen see triffin borio zhu insight defin liquid eas percept valu turn purchas power note bw time unit state manag keep sustain current account posit u current account inde record surplus though declin one onset vietnam war minor deficit whole bw period capit account side mirror larg longterm capit outflow unit state especi foreign direct invest fdi american multin financ shortterm capit inflow form bank deposit treasuri bill bond unit state therefor act banker world accumul u net longterm foreign asset reassur foreign investor eichengreen howev assum capit flow restrict underdevelop financi market elsewher world would persist countri would like soon reach limit abil engag matur transform capit account triffin predict core countri would eventu run increas current account deficit allow world trade expans therefor basic right bw rule offici liquid defin amount fund uncondit avail settl claim monetari author main consist central bank money reserv currenc foreign exchang reserv see exampl caballero caballero krishnamurthi see dorrucci mckay review literatur see exampl rajan see exampl angeloni et al see bini smaghi see landau reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en