"Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Central banks, liquidity and a changing financial market infrastructure",09-06-2008,European Central Bank,ECB,3102,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,I am very pleased to welcome you to this conference and I am grateful that I can do so also in the name of the Banque de France. Last week we celebrated the 10th anniversary of the ECB and the Eurosystem. Building on the expertise and reputation of the national central banks of the euro area, the ECB has developed well and we are very proud that the Eurosystem as a team has delivered what we were supposed to: we have achieved our main objective of price stability in the euro area and – more closely linked to this conference – the smooth operation of payment systems. Given the fast pace of financial markets today, I often feel that the ECB has been around for ages. When I look around this beautiful Galerie Dorée, however, I feel that the ECB is still a very young institution. What I find reassuring is the fact that the euro represents a tangible, perhaps the most tangible, realisation of something that is even older than our conference venue: the idea of Europe. Please allow me to quote Jean Monnet: “Lorsqu’une idée correspond à la nécessité de l’époque, elle cesse d’appartenir aux hommes qui l’ont inventée et elle est plus forte que ceux qui en ont la charge.” [When an idea meets the needs of the time, it ceases to belong to its creators and becomes more powerful than those responsible for it.]The well-being of Europe is closely linked to its economic prosperity. Economic well-being, in turn, depends crucially on a functioning financial system. I would like to take the opportunity of opening this conference to reflect on the more long-term trends in the financial sector with a special focus on liquidity in the context of market infrastructures. I will derive challenges from these trends that I think are particularly relevant for transfer systems. Finally, I will point out where I see the necessary and adequate responses of the private and public sector to these challenges, in particular the Eurosystem’s contribution to an efficient and safe infrastructure.Let me begin with a short reflection on liquidity. If we lived in a world with perfect and complete markets as envisaged by Arrow and Debreu, liquidity problems would not exist. Everybody would be able to make fully contingent arrangements to insure against unanticipated short-term needs for funds. Well, the recent financial turmoil has painfully reminded us that financial markets do not match the theoretical ideal world of the “Arrow-Debreu” model. What do we then mean when we speak of liquidity? In general, we can distinguish between at least three types of liquidity [1]: First, monetary or macroeconomic liquidity refers to a generally accepted medium of exchange. Such liquidity comprises central bank money and more broadly defined monetary aggregates. Second, market liquidity means the ability to trade an asset quickly and at low costs with little impact on its price [2]. A third concept is funding liquidity, which means the ease of firms, households or banks to meet their respective payment obligations with internal or external funds as they fall due.All these concepts are – of course – closely interrelated. Deviations from expected developments in any of these areas can cause severe disruptions. This is the essence of liquidity risk. In the context of transfer systems, which are the focus of my speech today, liquidity risk is defined as the risk that a counterparty or a participant in a payment or settlement system will not settle an obligation at its full value when due [3]. For example, the operational failure of a major institution in a real-time gross settlement (RTGS) system can turn it into a “liquidity sink”. This would have a negative external effect on the liquidity positions of other banks. Liquidity risks could thus turn into a systemic risk when disruptions would spread across the financial system [4]. Overall, liquidity risk is a crucial feature of the financial sector in general and market infrastructure in particular. This is ably illustrated by an interesting special issue of the Banque de France’s Financial Stability Report that focuses on liquidity [5].Let me take a step back now and look at some long-term trends in the financial sector that have had an impact on liquidity management and market infrastructures [6]. First, the financial sector has experienced a tremendous amount of technological and financial innovations. For example, real-time gross settlement systems with electronic book-entries have become state-of-the-art. Such RTGS systems reduce credit risk exposure in settlement, whilst increasing the demand for intraday liquidity and collateral. Financial innovation has also triggered a significant rise in the number of derivatives and the associated trading volume, not least on over-the-counter derivatives markets. Second, financial globalisation has become manifest in the amount of cross-border financial flows and cross-border banking, but it goes much further. The increased global integration has strengthened the natural tendency towards concentrated provision of infrastructural services, a tendency that is further accentuated in the context of the European single market. This third trend of increased concentration has not been limited to market infrastructures themselves. The emergence of key global players in banking has also led to increased internalisation of payment flows in correspondent banks. Correspondent banks perform payment and custody services for other banks and have in some cases reached a similar size to some national payment systems. Thus, correspondent banking begins to blur the distinction between intermediaries and infrastructure providers. Speaking of concentration, I would also like to mention networks of interoperable systems. They can be seen as intermediate steps towards concentration or as alternatives. All these developments have contributed to lower financing costs, new investment and business opportunities, and general welfare gains for all citizens. At the same time, these trends have increased the relevance of market infrastructures and pose considerable challenges for liquidity managers and central bankers, at all their time horizons. I want to stress here that market infrastructures have shown a considerable degree of resilience and functioned well during the recent months. This is a great achievement that should not be taken for granted. However, some of the trends that I have mentioned have also played a prominent role during the recent financial turmoil. Thus, there is no reason to be complacent. I see three challenges, especially from the perspective of market infrastructures, resulting from these trends. These are: growing interdependencies; the potential emergence of a global monopoly; and the need for well-functioning financial and political structures at the supranational level. Let me first focus on increased interdependencies created by financial globalisation in conjunction with the other trends that I have just mentioned. The significant benefits of financial globalisation come at the cost of a more complex global financial system. Previously, settlement flows, operational processes and risk management procedures could be considered largely from a national or even more a system-, institution- or market-specific perspective. Today, the various transfer systems, financial institutions and markets have become highly interdependent. This can be positive when the associated network effects improve the safety and efficiency of payment and settlement processes. However, it can also be negative when it allows an easier and quicker transmission of shocks and financial disruptions, sometimes in indirect, complex ways. The financial turmoil has once again highlighted how negative developments in one market segment can abruptly spill over to other, seemingly unrelated, segments of the financial sector and across borders. One cause of the severity of the turbulence is that financial institutions had not sufficiently foreseen that liquidity can dry up in certain markets very quickly. Negative effects can be exacerbated if banks do not have access to sufficient collateral. The interdependencies of payment and settlement systems are very well described by a recently released Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) report that I will refer to again when discussing the appropriate responses. [7] A second challenge arises from the potential emergence of a global monopoly. Economies of scale and network effects are prominent in fixed-cost-dominated infrastructure services. This has given rise to the rather utopian idea of a single integrated market infrastructure covering the whole world as the end-game of the process of financial globalisation and concentration. At the same time, a global monopoly might lead to a single point of failure and other economic costs associated with monopolies (such as the abuse of market power and a lack of innovation). However, it is not obvious that the alternative to a monopoly – that is, networks of interoperable systems – is superior. For example, are a small number of interoperable systems really less risky than a single system?A third challenge that I would like to highlight today concerns the difficulties in establishing a well-functioning financial and political structure at the supranational level. This challenge reflects the general change of perspective on the financial sector. Over long periods, mature and often efficient financial structures had emerged on a national level, protected by – to a large extent appropriate – regulation, supervision and oversight. National financial communities had developed a certain degree of trust, transparency and cooperation. Today, the perspective has changed from the national to the international level. However, we frequently face a geographical and legal separation between the entities in charge of the oversight of the system, relevant banking supervisors and the entity providing liquidity to the system. An important thing that the financial turmoil has demonstrated is that national degrees of trust, transparency and cooperation have not yet been replicated on an international, global level. This includes the existence of appropriate supervisory structures. Overall, we face the challenge to create the same seamlessly functioning financial system and market infrastructures on a supranational level that we have already today at national levels. It is very important to find adequate responses to these challenges. This duty – for the sake of economic prosperity – falls to all of us, the private sector as well as public authorities. Let me begin with some responsibilities of the private sector because, I believe, we should rely on market solutions as much as possible. Financial market participants need to take into account the increased interdependencies. As clearly described in the CPSS report, they need to adopt a holistic approach to risk management, in particular as banks have increasingly relied on wholesale and secured funding. And they need to focus on liquidity and operational risk. I have the impression that the private sector is aware of this challenge and is preparing the necessary response, as evident from the initiatives of the Institute of International Finance, for example. Various committees, both at the international and the EU level, are assisting the private sector in its work. Now, it is necessary to not lose momentum and to implement the proposed holistic approach to risk management. This means that systems and institutions need to look beyond their own operations and direct exposures to understand the broad range of disruptions that might affect them. This is most important for infrastructure and service providers as well as for financial institutions that have a critical role in the global infrastructure.The trend towards concentration represents the second, more long-term challenge that I have mentioned. I think that it makes a lot of sense to complement the European Monetary Union with harmonised and efficient market infrastructures in certain areas. However, I do not expect the utopian idea of a single, globally integrated infrastructure to become reality. Technological and financial innovation provides limits to concentration. New ideas, the exploitation of market niches and regulatory changes that promote competition will allow platforms to continue to have competitive advantages in some specialised areas. It is crucial that these platforms will be transparent, provide open access to potential users and enable interoperability with other platforms in order to reap the full benefits of financial globalisation. But as interoperability requires competitors to cooperate, I am aware that achieving sustainable and efficient solutions is not always easy. Finally, let me mention one particular point. As recently recommended by the Financial Stability Forum [8], market participants should make further efforts to ensure that the settlement, legal and operational infrastructure underlying over-the-counter derivatives markets is sound. I know that also the CPSS closely monitors developments in this area. Let me now turn to the responsibilities of public authorities Just like the market, they need to take into account the increased interdependencies, concentration and required international perspective. Being a central banker, I think it is my task to focus on the various roles of a central bank as a liquidity provider, service provider, catalyst and overseer. The relevance of collateral for liquidity issues has been clearly recognised by central banks. During the past ten years, central banks have – especially in the context of the CPSS and other Basel committees – focused jointly their attention on the use of collateral in financial transactions, including the cross-border use of collateral. [9] Cooperation in this respect is very useful and, especially for emergency situations, I would think that central banks – by enabling the cross-border use of collateral – could make a positive contribution to financial stability.As a service provider, the Eurosystem has demonstrated with the successful launch of the large-value payment system TARGET2 that it can deliver state-of-the-art infrastructure. TARGET2 is the biggest RTGS (real-time gross settlement) system and settles more than 350,000 transactions worth around €2.5 trillion every day. We in the Eurosystem have also worked a lot together with market participants on two other building blocks of a single European market infrastructure: TARGET2-Securities (T2S), a single settlement platform for securities, and CCBM2, a harmonised solution for collateral management within the Eurosystem. In today’s world, the availability of collateral has become the binding constraint for intraday liquidity management. Hence, it is extremely important to be able to move collateral quickly and safely across financial systems, borders and currencies. TARGET2, T2S and CCBM2 are three complementary and mutually beneficial services of the Eurosystem for this purpose. In a recent ECB survey, banks have reported minimum annual savings of €53 million in liquidity and collateral management alone from T2S. Based on the figures from market participants, the very conservatively estimated benefits of T2S for direct users of T2S are at least €145 million per year in the baseline scenario. For the European economy as a whole, we can anticipate dynamic benefits from T2S exceeding one billion euro per year [10]. In addition, TARGET2 and T2S make use of counterparty risk-free central bank money for settlement, a feature that has become even more beneficial in light of the financial turmoil.The Eurosystem has acted as a catalyst for another building block for an integrated European market infrastructure, the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA). The same holds true for the interoperability of existing systems. As specialised infrastructures are likely to remain, the relevance of interoperability between different systems stays at the top of the agenda. Oversight is the third role of central banks in payment and settlement systems. In general, market infrastructures have performed well during the financial turmoil, owing largely to effective capacity planning by service providers enabling them to handle recent peaks in volatility and trading. Overseers have to continue to monitor the safety and efficiency of individual payment and settlement “critical” infrastructure, as well as the safety of the financial system as a whole.To achieve this, the increased interdependence requires an international perspective to oversight. Overseers need to cooperate and to show a certain degree of convergence in order to avoid regulatory arbitrage and a “race to the bottom” of regulatory standards. I think that we have some scope for improvement on this dimension. Increased interdependence also calls for a second dimension of cooperation, namely between oversight of market infrastructures and banking supervision. For example, correspondent banks appear to provide substantial non-collateralised intraday credits to their clients. Traditional capital requirements, however, do not focus on the intraday liquidity aspects and on possible exposures during the day. Hence, it is crucial to ensure an adequate surveillance of these intraday risk exposures and the evolution of liquidity and collateral management at both system level and bank level. Recent work at the Bank for International Settlements and within the Eurosystem demonstrates that public authorities have recognised this necessity and started to address it. The ECB is strongly supportive of the various initiatives at the EU and global level and will contribute to the pertinent work. I firmly believe that the international cooperation among public authorities will continue to foster financial integration, development and stability.Let me now briefly conclude. The financial turmoil has once again demonstrated that liquidity should not be taken for granted. I have highlighted a number of more long-term financial sector trends that have had an impact on liquidity management and market infrastructures. Altogether, they result in new challenges from increased interdependencies, consolidation and the required international perspective on seamlessly functioning financial markets. The private sector and public authorities, both in their own responsibilities and in joint efforts, need to continue to address these challenges. We have made considerable progress in our understanding of the relevant issues and the necessary policy conclusions, as evident from the various initiatives that I mentioned. Financial market infrastructure is in evolution; its improvement remains an ongoing challenge. This conference hosts a number of papers and panel sessions that serve as further examples of how we are improving our understanding of liquidity and interdependent transfer systems. I am looking forward to interesting insights and stimulating discussions that will no doubt be inspired by the outstanding surroundings here in the Galerie Dorée.[1] See also Roger Ferguson, Philipp Hartmann, Fabio Panetta and Richard Portes (2007), “International Financial Stability”, Ninth Geneva Report on the World Economy, pp. 9-10.[2] For a more detailed discussion of market liquidity and its relationship to monetary liquidity, see the box “Understanding financial market liquidity” in the ECB Financial Stability Review, June 2007.[3] See the ECB glossary on the ECB website (http://www.ecb.europa.eu).[4] For example, Mark Flannery suggests in “Financial Crises, Payment System Problems and Discount Window Lending”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 28(4), 2006, pp. 804-824, that payment systems can serve as a contagion mechanism from funding liquidity to the interbank (market) liquidity. [5] The report is available at http://www.banque-france.fr/gb/publications/rsf/rsf_022008.htm. [6] These trends are discussed at more length in e.g. Ferguson et al. (op. cit.).[7] CPSS report on “The interdependencies of payment and settlement systems”, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, June 2008. [8] “Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience”, April 2008.[9] CPSS report on “Cross-Border Collateral Arrangements”, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, January 2006.[10] The ECB’s “T2S Economic Impact Assessment” is available at http://www.ecb.europa.eu/paym/t2s/pdf/eco_impact_080523.pdf. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen pleas welcom confer grate also name banqu de franc last week celebr th anniversari ecb eurosystem build expertis reput nation central bank euro area ecb develop well proud eurosystem team deliv suppos achiev main object price stabil euro area close link confer smooth oper payment system given fast pace financi market today often feel ecb around age look around beauti galeri doré howev feel ecb still young institut find reassur fact euro repres tangibl perhap tangibl realis someth even older confer venu idea europ pleas allow quot jean monnet lorsqu une idé correspond à la nécessité de l époqu ell cess d appartenir aux homm qui l ont inventé et ell est plus fort que ceux qui en ont la charg idea meet need time ceas belong creator becom power respons wellb europ close link econom prosper econom wellb turn depend crucial function financi system would like take opportun open confer reflect longterm trend financi sector special focus liquid context market infrastructur deriv challeng trend think particular relev transfer system final point see necessari adequ respons privat public sector challeng particular eurosystem contribut effici safe infrastructur let begin short reflect liquid live world perfect complet market envisag arrow debreu liquid problem would exist everybodi would abl make fulli conting arrang insur unanticip shortterm need fund well recent financi turmoil pain remind us financi market match theoret ideal world arrowdebreu model mean speak liquid general distinguish least three type liquid first monetari macroeconom liquid refer general accept medium exchang liquid compris central bank money broad defin monetari aggreg second market liquid mean abil trade asset quick low cost littl impact price third concept fund liquid mean eas firm household bank meet respect payment oblig intern extern fund fall due concept cours close interrel deviat expect develop area caus sever disrupt essenc liquid risk context transfer system focus speech today liquid risk defin risk counterparti particip payment settlement system settl oblig full valu due exampl oper failur major institut realtim gross settlement rtgs system turn liquid sink would negat extern effect liquid posit bank liquid risk could thus turn system risk disrupt would spread across financi system overal liquid risk crucial featur financi sector general market infrastructur particular abli illustr interest special issu banqu de franc financi stabil report focus liquid let take step back look longterm trend financi sector impact liquid manag market infrastructur first financi sector experienc tremend amount technolog financi innov exampl realtim gross settlement system electron bookentri becom stateoftheart rtgs system reduc credit risk exposur settlement whilst increas demand intraday liquid collater financi innov also trigger signific rise number deriv associ trade volum least overthecount deriv market second financi globalis becom manifest amount crossbord financi flow crossbord bank goe much increas global integr strengthen natur tendenc toward concentr provis infrastructur servic tendenc accentu context european singl market third trend increas concentr limit market infrastructur emerg key global player bank also led increas internalis payment flow correspond bank correspond bank perform payment custodi servic bank case reach similar size nation payment system thus correspond bank begin blur distinct intermediari infrastructur provid speak concentr would also like mention network interoper system seen intermedi step toward concentr altern develop contribut lower financ cost new invest busi opportun general welfar gain citizen time trend increas relev market infrastructur pose consider challeng liquid manag central banker time horizon want stress market infrastructur shown consider degre resili function well recent month great achiev taken grant howev trend mention also play promin role recent financi turmoil thus reason complac see three challeng especi perspect market infrastructur result trend grow interdepend potenti emerg global monopoli need wellfunct financi polit structur supran level let first focus increas interdepend creat financi globalis conjunct trend mention signific benefit financi globalis come cost complex global financi system previous settlement flow oper process risk manag procedur could consid larg nation even system institut marketspecif perspect today various transfer system financi institut market becom high interdepend posit associ network effect improv safeti effici payment settlement process howev also negat allow easier quicker transmiss shock financi disrupt sometim indirect complex way financi turmoil highlight negat develop one market segment abrupt spill seem unrel segment financi sector across border one caus sever turbul financi institut suffici foreseen liquid dri certain market quick negat effect exacerb bank access suffici collater interdepend payment settlement system well describ recent releas committe payment settlement system cpss report refer discuss appropri respons second challeng aris potenti emerg global monopoli economi scale network effect promin fixedcostdomin infrastructur servic given rise rather utopian idea singl integr market infrastructur cover whole world endgam process financi globalis concentr time global monopoli might lead singl point failur econom cost associ monopoli abus market power lack innov howev obvious altern monopoli network interoper system superior exampl small number interoper system realli less riski singl system third challeng would like highlight today concern difficulti establish wellfunct financi polit structur supran level challeng reflect general chang perspect financi sector long period matur often effici financi structur emerg nation level protect larg extent appropri regul supervis oversight nation financi communiti develop certain degre trust transpar cooper today perspect chang nation intern level howev frequent face geograph legal separ entiti charg oversight system relev bank supervisor entiti provid liquid system import thing financi turmoil demonstr nation degre trust transpar cooper yet replic intern global level includ exist appropri supervisori structur overal face challeng creat seamless function financi system market infrastructur supran level alreadi today nation level import find adequ respons challeng duti sake econom prosper fall us privat sector well public author let begin respons privat sector believ reli market solut much possibl financi market particip need take account increas interdepend clear describ cpss report need adopt holist approach risk manag particular bank increas reli wholesal secur fund need focus liquid oper risk impress privat sector awar challeng prepar necessari respons evid initi institut intern financ exampl various committe intern eu level assist privat sector work necessari lose momentum implement propos holist approach risk manag mean system institut need look beyond oper direct exposur understand broad rang disrupt might affect import infrastructur servic provid well financi institut critic role global infrastructur trend toward concentr repres second longterm challeng mention think make lot sens complement european monetari union harmonis effici market infrastructur certain area howev expect utopian idea singl global integr infrastructur becom realiti technolog financi innov provid limit concentr new idea exploit market nich regulatori chang promot competit allow platform continu competit advantag specialis area crucial platform transpar provid open access potenti user enabl interoper platform order reap full benefit financi globalis interoper requir competitor cooper awar achiev sustain effici solut alway easi final let mention one particular point recent recommend financi stabil forum market particip make effort ensur settlement legal oper infrastructur under overthecount deriv market sound know also cpss close monitor develop area let turn respons public author like market need take account increas interdepend concentr requir intern perspect central banker think task focus various role central bank liquid provid servic provid catalyst overs relev collater liquid issu clear recognis central bank past ten year central bank especi context cpss basel committe focus joint attent use collater financi transact includ crossbord use collater cooper respect use especi emerg situat would think central bank enabl crossbord use collater could make posit contribut financi stabil servic provid eurosystem demonstr success launch largevalu payment system target deliv stateoftheart infrastructur target biggest rtgs realtim gross settlement system settl transact worth around trillion everi day eurosystem also work lot togeth market particip two build block singl european market infrastructur target secur singl settlement platform secur ccbm harmonis solut collater manag within eurosystem today world avail collater becom bind constraint intraday liquid manag henc extrem import abl move collater quick safe across financi system border currenc target ccbm three complementari mutual benefici servic eurosystem purpos recent ecb survey bank report minimum annual save million liquid collater manag alon base figur market particip conserv estim benefit direct user least million per year baselin scenario european economi whole anticip dynam benefit exceed one billion euro per year addit target make use counterparti riskfre central bank money settlement featur becom even benefici light financi turmoil eurosystem act catalyst anoth build block integr european market infrastructur singl euro payment area sepa hold true interoper exist system specialis infrastructur like remain relev interoper differ system stay top agenda oversight third role central bank payment settlement system general market infrastructur perform well financi turmoil owe larg effect capac plan servic provid enabl handl recent peak volatil trade overs continu monitor safeti effici individu payment settlement critic infrastructur well safeti financi system whole achiev increas interdepend requir intern perspect oversight overs need cooper show certain degre converg order avoid regulatori arbitrag race bottom regulatori standard think scope improv dimens increas interdepend also call second dimens cooper name oversight market infrastructur bank supervis exampl correspond bank appear provid substanti noncollateralis intraday credit client tradit capit requir howev focus intraday liquid aspect possibl exposur day henc crucial ensur adequ surveil intraday risk exposur evolut liquid collater manag system level bank level recent work bank intern settlement within eurosystem demonstr public author recognis necess start address ecb strong support various initi eu global level contribut pertin work firm believ intern cooper among public author continu foster financi integr develop stabil let briefli conclud financi turmoil demonstr liquid taken grant highlight number longterm financi sector trend impact liquid manag market infrastructur altogeth result new challeng increas interdepend consolid requir intern perspect seamless function financi market privat sector public author respons joint effort need continu address challeng made consider progress understand relev issu necessari polici conclus evid various initi mention financi market infrastructur evolut improv remain ongo challeng confer host number paper panel session serv exampl improv understand liquid interdepend transfer system look forward interest insight stimul discuss doubt inspir outstand surround galeri doré see also roger ferguson hartmann fabio panetta richard port intern financi stabil ninth geneva report world economi pp detail discuss market liquid relationship monetari liquid see box understand financi market liquid ecb financi stabil review june see ecb glossari ecb websit http www ecb europa eu exampl mark flanneri suggest financi crise payment system problem discount window lend journal money credit bank pp payment system serv contagion mechan fund liquid interbank market liquid report avail http www banquefr frgbpublicationsrsfrsf_ htm trend discuss length e g ferguson et al op cit cpss report interdepend payment settlement system bank intern settlement basel june report financi stabil forum enhanc market institut resili april cpss report crossbord collater arrang bank intern settlement basel januari ecb econom impact assess avail http www ecb europa eupaymt spdfeco_impact_ pdf reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en