Lucas Papademos: Globalisation and central bank policies,22-01-2008,European Central Bank,ECB,7284,"<p>For years now, globalisation has been, and continues to be, a buzzword in the public debate. Its persistent significance is certainly also due to the fact that it is such a multi-faceted phenomenon which has yet to be fully understood and assessed. Globalisation encompasses a broad range of aspects – economic, social, political, cultural and intellectual – and many of these are of relevance to public policy. Even though public discourse often focuses on the economic consequences of globalisation – the integration of markets and its associated distributional effects – globalisation is about more than the free exchange of goods, services and capital on global markets. It is also about an unprecedented opportunity to exchange knowledge and ideas across the globe. And the Bridge Forum Dialogue here in Luxembourg provides an excellent platform to see this intellectual facet of globalisation in action. I should like to thank Governor Mersch, the President of the Forum, for having invited me, and I am looking forward to an enriching debate with my fellow panellists and the audience on the theme of this year’s event: “Globalisation: how to manage it?” Exploiting my professional comparative advantage, I will elaborate on the central bank perspective. In my remarks, I intend to address three aspects of globalisation and their potential impact on central bank policies:First, I will discuss to what extent globalisation may affect the conduct and effectiveness of monetary policy in controlling inflation and influencing domestic economic activity. Or: does globalisation alter the job of a central bank, and if so, how? Second, I will explore the impact of globalisation on the functioning of financial markets, which is of course a particularly pertinent issue during the ongoing financial market turmoil, and its potential implications for financial stability. Or: did we sow the wind of financial globalisation, only to reap the whirlwind of market turbulence? Third, I will briefly seek to shed some light on links between monetary policy and financial stability, and how globalisation may affect this interrelation. Or: did past central bank policies worldwide play a part in building up imbalances in global financial markets whose correction and unwinding we are witnessing at present?In recent years, it has been argued that globalisation has had – or is likely to have – significant implications for the conduct and effectiveness of monetary policy in controlling inflation and influencing domestic economic activity. It has been suggested by some that the effectiveness of monetary policy could be impaired as a consequence of the impact of globalisation on the structure and functioning of markets – product, labour and financial markets – which would affect – and in the extreme disrupt – important channels of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. Various effects have been discussed and analysed, and a number of empirical studies have attempted to estimate their quantitative significance. Simply put, globalisation could undermine the effectiveness of monetary policy as a result of its impact on both domestic aggregate demand and aggregate supply. The channels through which monetary policy influences aggregate demand could be impaired if domestic interest rates and domestic aggregate demand are increasingly determined by global factors rather than domestic monetary policy. On the supply side, globalisation could affect inflation dynamics in various ways, notably by reducing the responsiveness of domestic inflation to domestic firms’ marginal cost increases, by making “global economic slack” rather than the domestic output gap an important determinant of domestic inflation pressure, and possibly by influencing the trend rate of change in the terms of trade.With regard to the influence of globalisation on domestic aggregate demand, two arguments have been advanced. First, in a financially integrated world it has been argued that it is global monetary liquidity rather than domestic liquidity which affects domestic interest rates and domestic economic activity, mainly – though not exclusively – through its effects on liquidity premia. Second, it has been claimed that the level of longer-term domestic real interest rates is likely to be determined by global savings and investment rather than its national components. These influences can be expected to be more pronounced for smaller economies. Therefore, a smaller country which cannot affect the global supply of liquidity to any significant degree could then lose effective control of inflation. This reasoning, however, is dubious, and not supported by theory or confirmed by empirical evidence. For example, in a two-country new Keynesian model, it has been shown that, provided exchange rates are flexible, global monetary factors can affect the domestic price level only through their potential short-term effects on global output. [1] Interestingly, the sign of the spill-over effect is the opposite of what would be expected from the global liquidity hypothesis. A comparatively loose foreign monetary policy induces a depreciation of the foreign currency and has a negative impact on domestic demand and prices in the home country. The main conclusion of rigorous theoretical analysis is that monetary policy can affect domestic demand even in a fully financially integrated world and even in a small country, as long as exchange rates are flexible. The exchange rate channel plays a more prominent role than the interest rate channel in the monetary transmission mechanism, to an extent which depends on the relative size of a country and the degree of financial market integration. This result is fully consistent with basic economic theory. Thus, the ability of central banks to control price developments over the medium term by influencing aggregate demand is not undermined, although the role and relative importance of different transmission channels might be affected by increasing global financial integration. What is the empirical evidence about the potential impact of globalisation on this channel of the monetary transmission mechanism? It is theoretically plausible that globalisation can influence to a certain extent key determinants of long-term interest rates, such as the global riskless real interest rate and the real risk premium.  [2] Moreover, inflation expectations and the inflation risk premium may also have been influenced to some degree by the forces of globalisation, though monetary policy across the globe has certainly been the main factor. There is some empirical evidence that in the euro area, as well as in a broader sample of OECD countries, long-term rates are reacting less to changes in short-term rates than they used to.  [3] Global factors seem to be increasingly important in determining national real bond yields.  [4] Furthermore, the co-movement of US, German and Japanese bond yields has been exceptionally high over the past few years.  [5] My interpretation of these findings is that, although global forces have played an important role in determining domestic long-term interest rates, they do not provide sufficient evidence to conclude that the effectiveness of monetary policy in controlling inflation has been reduced. The increased significance of global factors identified by empirical analysis is likely to reflect common trends as well as the similar orientation of monetary policies and their success in containing inflationary pressures. If national monetary policies diverge from such a common orientation, which itself has been fostered by increasing competition between currencies  [6], the observed regularities are likely to be affected. A central bank is still able to influence aggregate demand and preserve price stability under floating exchange rates. Let me now turn to the effects of globalisation on the aggregate supply and on the dynamics of inflation. Several effects have been identified or suggested, some of which are relatively direct and others indirect. Globalisation can affect inflation dynamics through various channels: (1) by influencing the responsiveness of wages and prices to measures of domestic slack in the labour and product markets (that is, by affecting the slope of the short-term Phillips curve and the sensitivity of profit margins to cyclical factors); (2) by affecting trend productivity growth; and (3) by causing shifts in the “natural rate of unemployment” or NAIRU; (4) by making a measure of “global economic slack” an important determinant of domestic inflationary pressure; and (5), more directly, by affecting the trend rates of change of the relative prices of imported final goods, intermediate products and commodities. It is important to keep in mind the various channels and potential effects because their impact can be offsetting, and also because theoretical arguments and empirical analyse often focus only on some of the potential channels, thus providing a partial picture. I will elaborate on some of these effects and the empirical evidence for the euro area.Economic theory does not provide unambiguous conclusions about the impact of globalisation on the slope of the short-term Phillips curve, that is, on the responsiveness of domestic inflation to measures of domestic economic slack, e.g. the output gap and/or the deviation of unemployment from its natural rate. Arguments can be advanced – and have been advanced – that imply that globalisation would tend to make the Phillips curve flatter  [7] or steeper. [8] Kenneth Rogoff has agued that inflation becomes more responsive to domestic excess demand if price rigidities are reduced and the economy becomes more flexible as a result of increased competitive pressure induced by globalisation. The proposition that a measure of “global economic slack” rather than the domestic output gap is a more important determinant of domestic inflation pressure has been discussed extensively. This hypothesis, if valid, would imply that the slope of the short-term Phillips curve, which depicts the responsiveness of inflation to domestic excess demand, becomes flatter.  [9] Thus, in a globalised world – so it has been argued – a much stronger monetary policy response would be required, other things being equal, to preserve price stability over the medium term in the presence of adverse shocks. But also in this regard there exists no robust empirical evidence or solid and convincing theoretical foundation to support the claim that a structural change has taken place. [10] Empirical estimates for the euro area do not show a significant change in the slope of the short-term Phillips curve. Furthermore, it would be misleading to interpret the recently observed low correlation between domestic output gaps and domestic inflation in some countries as a structural change in the short-term Phillips curves. A reduced correlation – or even a lack of it – could simply be a consequence of the effective monetary policies of central banks which have succeeded in anchoring inflation expectations to price stability. [11] The two more direct effects of globalisation on world and domestic inflation dynamics have been more visible but have partly offset each other, and the relative impact may be changing over time. On the one hand, raw materials and basic commodities, notably oil and other sources of energy, have become scarcer relative to world demand, leading to substantial upward pressure on prices. [see Chart 1] For example, Brent crude oil prices have increased almost tenfold over the last nine years, reflecting to a very large extent the impact of rising demand, especially in emerging market economies [see Chart 2], although supply-side factors have also played a role during some periods. On the other hand, the integration of a large reserve of low-cost, skilled labour in the international economy and the increasing production of manufactured goods in emerging market economies have put downward pressure on import prices of manufactured goods as well as on wage demands in industrial economies. As a consequence, the prices of a wide range of manufactured goods have been declining since 2000. This is reflected in the unit value of imports of manufactured products in the euro area, which in mid-2007 was virtually at the same level as in 2000. [see Chart 3]The counteracting effects of these global price pressures on euro area inflation can be observed more clearly if we take a look at the development of the overall Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) and selected components (energy and non-energy industrial goods). [see Chart 4] The prices paid by consumers for energy products, which account for approximately 9% of euro area private consumption, surged at an average rate of 5.4% per annum following the series of sharp oil price increases over the period 1999-2007. But, the prices of other consumer goods, such as non-energy industrial goods, which account for over 30% of total private consumption, increased at a more moderate rate of 0.7% per annum on average during the same period.In an environment of significant and persistent changes in the relative prices of energy goods and agricultural products, the price increases of these goods, which are comparatively more visible to consumers than the relatively more stable prices of many other consumer goods, may, therefore, adversely affect inflation expectations. Consequently, it is crucial for monetary policy to anchor inflation expectations to price stability, and to ensure that second-round effects of increases in energy prices and other commodity prices on price and wage-setting do not materialise. All in all, the empirical evidence on how globalisation has directly affected consumer price inflation in the advanced economies reveals a rather muted impact. Inflation in the euro area is likely to have been 0.0 – 0.3 percentage points lower per annum as a result of the net impact of the inflation-dampening effect of non-commodity import prices and the inflation-augmenting effect of commodity import prices over the past decade.  [12] The two effects are linked and have partly offset each other as they reflect the impact of emerging market economies on the prices of manufactured goods and world commodity prices. The size and sign of the net impact on the inflation of advanced economies in the future are surrounded by uncertainty, and are likely to change as globalisation unfolds.Do central banks need to adapt their monetary policy strategies to cope with the challenges of globalisation? It has been shown that the rationale for maintaining price stability – the primary objective of the ECB and of many other major central banks – is strengthened by financial globalisation for at least two reasons. First, if international risk-sharing loosens the link between domestic consumption and domestic output, optimal monetary policy would tend to increase the relative weight on price stability at the expense of output variability, as it is real consumption which ultimately matters for social welfare. Second, the welfare-maximising weight to be attributed to price stability also increases when international risk-sharing is obtained by means of cross-border holdings of nominal assets (e.g. non-inflation indexed bonds), as inflation would seriously distort effective risk-sharing. These interesting arguments bring me to the second part of my presentation on the potential implications of globalisation for financial stability.Let me now focus on the effects of globalisation on the functioning of financial markets and institutions and the potential implications of these effects for the performance of the central bank task of safeguarding financial stability. This issue is both important and topical as the pace of global financial integration has accelerated in recent years and as the ongoing financial market turmoil has clearly demonstrated. Financial globalisation involves the increasing integration of financial markets and the growing presence of cross-border financial institutions. Financial globalisation is often defined and measured by the extent to which countries are linked through cross-border financial holdings. A commonly used indicator of financial globalisation is the sum of countries’ gross foreign assets and liabilities as a proportion of GDP. The evolution of this indicator documents the impressive dynamics of financial globalisation since the mid-1990s, especially for advanced economies (and to a lesser extent for emerging markets and developing countries). [see Chart 5]. In the euro area alone, the ratio of the sum of foreign assets and liabilities to GDP increased from 190% in 1999, the year the euro was launched, to 280% in 2005. It is also impressive and relevant that the pace of financial integration for advanced economies was much faster than that of their trade integration from the early 1990s onwards. This is evidenced by the ratio of the sum of external assets and liabilities to the sum of exports and imports [see Chart 6]. Interestingly, this same ratio has been roughly stable for emerging market economies and developing countries over the same period. Finally, another pertinent indicator measures the extent and rapidly growing importance of the total cross-border bank assets and liabilities since the early 1990s, which increased fivefold from about 5 trillion US dollars in 1990 to almost 25 trillion US dollars in 2006. [Chart 7]. The fast pace of financial globalisation has reflected, and at the same time has contributed to, the rapid development of financial markets. Both financial integration and development have been driven by several factors: deregulation, capital liberalisation, financial innovation and advances in communication and information technology. These factors have contributed, in a mutually reinforcing manner, to the exceptional growth of the overall size of financial markets relative to GDP [Chart 8] and the consolidation of the banking sector, with the emergence of large and complex financial institutions. They have also contributed to the exponential growth of new financial instruments, the adoption by banks of the “originate and distribute” business model and the increasing presence of new financial intermediaries. In addition, the distribution of net saving flows across the globe, with large excess saving (relative to domestic investment opportunities) in some emerging market economies searching for higher global investment returns also contributed to the fast pace of financial globalisation and development in recent years. When examining and assessing the effects of globalisation on the financial system – its efficiency and stability – it is important to keep in mind the role of the other factors, e.g. financial innovation, new business models, risk management practices, which have simultaneously exerted a significant impact on the functioning of financial markets and institutions.The securitisation of bank loans and the development of credit risk transfer (CRT) instruments and complex structured finance products have fundamentally changed the functioning of the financial system and the distribution of risk across sectors and borders. Since the mid-1980s, an unprecedented growth in the development and issuance of new financial market instruments has allowed the transfer of risks across market participants also in connection with previously relatively illiquid assets like bank loans and mortgages. While initially the focus was on transferring market risk, credit risk transfer instruments have increasingly gained in importance since the 1990s. [13] With respect to securitisation, this development can best be described by pointing out that the outstanding value of US agency mortgage-backed securities grew from about 100 billion US dollars in 1980 to about 4 trillion dollars in 2006 [Chart 9]. Annual securitisation is about 3 trillion US dollars a year in the US and about 500 billion euro in Europe. In both areas, mortgage-backed securities account for the bulk of the total. With respect to credit risk transfer instruments, the increase in the notional value of global credit default swaps has been phenomenal, from 90 billion US dollars in 2001 to 34 trillion US dollars in 2006. Over the same period, the share of credit default swaps in the overall derivatives market increased from 1 to 11% [Chart 10]. Collateralised debt obligations (CDOs) are another major type of security used to transfer credit risk. The global issuance of CDOs more than tripled between 2004 and 2006 [Chart 10]. One prominent feature of the development of the financial system is that it has become much more “leveraged”, as indicated by the ratio of total monetary and financial assets relative to the monetary base (central bank money). What have been the effects of financial globalisation and development on the efficiency and stability of the financial system, on trend economic growth and on output and financial market volatility? Let me first examine the impact on efficiency, growth and output volatility. The available empirical evidence supports the view that the development of the financial sector, as measured by financial market size and other indicators of its features and sophistication, has had positive effects on the efficient functioning of product markets and has fostered (total factor) productivity gains and output growth. [14] The evidence on the impact of financial globalisation on economic growth is not as conclusive or sufficiently robust. [15] This partly reflects the fact that the impact is conditional on the macroeconomic policies pursued as well on the institutional and regulatory framework in place, which makes it difficult to isolate empirically and estimate its net contribution. Moreover, the impact of financial globalisation on growth may take some time to become visible as it exerts its influence through various channels, some of which involve indirect effects. Indeed, a new approach which emphasises the indirect effects of financial globalisation growth by promoting the development of the financial sector, by strengthening competition and by enhancing market discipline on macroeconomic policies suggests that the total impact on growth of financial globalisation through these indirect effects can be significant. In particular, for advanced economies their integration into global financial markets fosters (total factor) productivity growth and improves risk-sharing. Moreover, there is some evidence that financially integrated economies can absorb shocks – and can tolerate a higher level of volatility – without this volatility having an adverse effect on growth. [16]An important issue for financial system stability is whether financial globalisation has been –or can be– a key factor in reducing volatility and increasing liquidity in financial markets. Over a number of years, before the current financial market turmoil, global financial markets were characterised by abundant liquidity which had indeed reached unprecedented levels. Financial market liquidity, a concept distinct from monetary liquidity, is a measure of the ability of market participants to undertake transactions without triggering large changes in asset prices. The abundant financial market liquidity over the period 2003 until the summer of 2007 was associated with very low market volatility, especially in equity and bond markets [chart 11], low risk aversion [chart 12], low corporate bond yield spreads [chart 13] and credit spreads, high leverage and high market turnover. It also reflected the “search for yield” and confidence in the smooth functioning of the market. A composite indicator of financial market liquidity in the euro area equity, bond, credit and foreign exchange markets, [17] constructed at the ECB [chart 14] shows that financial market liquidity had increased significantly since 2001, rose sharply in 2003 and 2004 and remained at high level until the summer of 2007. A similar indicator constructed by the Bank of England for the UK financial market highlights the global dimension of this phenomenon and a similar trend. It has been argued by some that increasing financial market integration –the liberalisation of international capital flows– was a key determinant of this increase in market liquidity and the associated decline in market volatility. But a more careful analysis shows that other factors played an important role, such as the rapid growth of new financial instruments, the increasing presence of very active and highly leveraged financial market participants. Moreover, ample market liquidity also reflected an increase in risk appetite and a rise in leverage. And the recent market developments showed that an abrupt and sizeable increase in risk aversion caused an evaporation of liquidity in many markets and a rise in market volatility. Therefore, although financial globalisation can play a role in containing market volatility, it cannot be expected to have a dominant and permanent impact.What are the broader potential implications of financial globalisation for the stability of financial systems? How are real and financial shocks likely to propagate across borders and asset classes in a financially integrated world? On the one hand, there is obviously an augmented risk of cross-border contagion of asymmetric shocks to the rest of the world if cross-border asset holding is widespread. On the other hand, this risk has to be weighed against the positive side of the very same coin, which is the benefit gained from an increase in international risk-sharing by means of diversification. The resilience of financial asset prices to negative shocks is improved when the market is more liquid and the investor base more heterogeneous. On balance, despite the ongoing financial turmoil, I would argue that financial integration has had a stabilising influence on the global financial system for the reasons just mentioned [18]. If, however, risk assessment and management is inadequate, asset valuation is difficult and highly uncertain, and incentives are distorted, the risks to financial stability could increase.The current financial turmoil provides a clear example of how a shock to a relatively small segment of a national financial market can spread globally across borders and across other markets. As early as 2005, US sub-prime loan delinquencies started to rise. Consequently the value of credit products based on sub-prime mortgages rated lower than AA started falling. But it was not until two hedge funds from Bear Stearns with active exposure in the sub-prime market had almost lost all their capital by June 2007 and when some rating agencies in early July announced that they would downgrade many asset-backed securities (ABSs) and collateralised debt obligations (CDOs) that a significant reassessment of the expected returns of structured finance products took place and AA and AAA-rated asset-backed securities (or ABS) also started falling in value. The following general re-pricing of risk [see Chart 15] and tensions in credit markets (e.g. also the corporate bond market) now affected several countries other than the US (e.g. the corporate bond markets in the US and Europe). Financial market liquidity for most structured credit products started evaporating [Chart 16]. Equity markets have also been affected by the increase in risk aversion and a general flight to quality.  [19] As a consequence of inadequate risk management, and in particular liquidity risk management, the interbank money market came under pressure. Due to the complexity of pricing structured credit products and the lack of transparency of banks’ exposures to investment vehicles heavily in need of refinancing their ABS investments (which, at that time, were more or less fully illiquid), an adverse selection problem in the interbank market led to concerns about systemic risk. Banks were reluctant to lend to each other because of concerns about the counterparty’s exposure to sub-prime related assets and also uncertainty about their own liquidity needs. In August 2007, interest rates in the unsecured money market started to rise significantly above the policy rates, also for very short-term maturities. Indicators of financial market liquidity, in a number of markets, declined dramatically.Since August 2007, the ECB has launched a series of market operations aimed to address pressures in the money market, to ensure that very short-term money market rates remain close to the ECB’s policy rates and thus to contain spill-over effects to the financial system and the real economy. These operations have succeeding in stabilising the very short-term interbank rate and reduced tensions in the long-term money market. Because money market pressures had remained at elevated levels globally until December [Chart 17], a global response was called for, in the form of a joint action of major central banks in the advanced economies, including the ECB, to provide US dollar liquidity to financial institutions also outside the US. Overall, the central bank operations have had a positive impact on money markets worldwide and contributed to mitigating the effects of the turmoil on the financial system and the economy. However, persisting uncertainty in financial markets – which these actions cannot address, and were not intended to address – imply that pressures in the longer-term money market remain, although at significantly reduced level since December 2007. The European Central Bank continues to stand ready to act in a swift and decisive manner in order to ensure the orderly functioning of money markets.]What have been the underlying main causes of the financial market turmoil? What have been the key weaknesses in the functioning of the financial system that have been revealed? And what are the appropriate further responses of market participants and policy-makers? A full diagnosis of the causes and weaknesses is not yet complete and, indeed, not possible as the market adjustment is still ongoing. Nevertheless, I would like to highlight four areas that are also pertinent to the issues of financial integration and development we are discussing.  First, the underlying causes and triggers are to be found in the price dynamics of the US housing market and the excesses and shortcomings (in the practices) in the US sub-prime mortgage market. So, a main determining factor of the financial market turbulence is that same one – property price overvaluation – that characterised previous episodes, as emphasised by Kenneth Rogoff.  Second, weaknesses in the functioning of the market for structured finance products. These included valuation uncertainties due to the complexity of many products, the imperfect information available about the underlying asset characteristics, inadequate appreciation by investors of the embedded risks, and excessive reliance on the ratings of such products by credit rating agencies.  Third, weaknesses in the implementation of the “originate-and-distribute” model by banks and in the chain of distribution and acquisition of credit risks. These shortcomings included inappropriate incentive structures for banks, as well as other financial entities and agents in the securitisation process, which fostered moral hazard and contributed to the inadequate assessment and management of credit and funding-liquidity risk.  Fourth, the role and features of new financial entities – the off-balance sheet conduits and structured investment vehicles (SIVs) – which were linked to banks through management and financing, and played a key role in the transmission of tensions from the structured finance product markets to the money markets, as a result of the maturity mismatch on their balance sheets and the associated funding liquidity risk. The creation of these investment vehicles and the associated substantial off-balance sheet exposures of banks to the structured credit products was the unintended consequence of regulatory arbitrage, and reflected the poor assessment and management of the funding and market liquidity risks as well as the reputational risks faced by a number of banks.Overall, the weaknesses in the functioning of the financial system revealed by the financial market turmoil lead to the general conclusion that financial integration and development have not been accompanied by adequate appreciation of risks, effective risk management and sufficient market discipline. The divergence between financial development, on the one hand, and sufficient discipline and effective risk management, on the other, should be bridged. This should be done not by measures that stifle financial innovation and market efficiency, but by actions and an institutional framework that encourage prudent behaviour and adequate risk assessment and management. More specifically, the securitisation of bank loans and other assets and the “originate and distribute” model should not be abandoned. Securitisation and the new bank model do entail economic and social benefits as they contribute to a better allocation of financial resources and a wider diversification of risks across markets and frontiers. At the same time, it is evident that this bank model and the securitisation process should be strengthened by improving incentive structures, risk assessment and management practices, and by increasing transparency. Similarly, the structured finance market, in order to be revitalised, will require actions that address the valuation problems and increase transparency and disclosure, so as to enhance the understanding and assessment of the embedded risks and to improve the practices of agencies and financial entities involved in their creation, rating and distribution of such products. Standardisation of some of the structured finance products could facilitate the market’s functioning. More generally, the risk management systems and practices of banks and other financial institutions should be further improved. This will require better and more extensive stress-testing in order to enable them to better assess the potential impact of tail risks and correlated risks.The actions needed to enhance market discipline and strengthen the resilience of the financial systems are currently being examined both by market participants and policy-makers. The recent experience has provided financial institutions and other markets participants with strong incentives to address the weaknesses revealed in various ways, including via improved transparency about exposures and greater disclosure of risks in products and processes. Financial regulators and supervisors are also examining ways to strengthen the resilience of the financial system through a robust framework that ensures adequate capital and liquidity buffers, and encourages market discipline and promotes effective risk management. At global level, the Financial Stability Forum will present a report to the G7 Ministers and Governors in April 2008 which will include recommended actions to achieve these objectives.What has been the impact of financial globalisation in the unfolding of the ongoing financial turmoil? It is a key factor that had contributed to boosting market liquidity, reducing market volatility and fostering financial development in the preceding years. Moreover, it facilitated the propagation of shocks and the spreading of sub-prime related risks to Europe, as a result of the acquisition of large exposures by European banks to structured finance products based on bank assets originating from across the Atlantic and European banks major involvement in the dollar asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) market, where, at a certain point in time, they accounted for about 50% of the funding. But, having said that, it would be wrong to conclude that financial globalisation is to be blamed for the financial turmoil as it cannot be considered responsible for the fundamental causes and key weaknesses I identified earlier and which resulted in the associated mispricing of risks and the mismanagement of assets and liabilities by some financial institutions. On the contrary, financial globalisation has contributed, other things being equal, through international risk-sharing to cushioning the impact of shocks on national financial systems and economies and it has also facilitated the boosting of the capital buffers and the restoration of the balance sheets of banks weakened by the turmoil.The recent financial market episode has highlighted an important implication of financial integration for central banking: the usefulness of effective cooperation and coordinated action by central banks in managing liquidity and ensuring the efficient functioning of interbank money markets. It has also clearly shown the benefits of closer cooperation and improved information-sharing between financial supervisors and central banks. Such enhanced interaction would contribute to a better assessment of the potential systemic implications of financial shocks, and assist in addressing market tensions or problems faced by individual financial institutions.There is one final and important issue I would like to briefly consider: the interrelation between globalisation, monetary policy and financial stability. It has been plausibly argued that globalisation has played an important role in determining the low level of world real interest rates, for example as a result of emerging market savings having been mainly invested in developed economies due to a lack of investment opportunities in the respective home markets [20]. This has induced a decline in the equilibrium global real interest rates, which monetary policies have accommodated with low nominal interest rates. [21] Obviously there remain risks associated with a potential abrupt unwinding of global imbalances and investment strategies strongly influenced by a low interest rate environment. But monetary policies have not played a role in the emergence of global imbalances and associated financial stability risks.Alternatively, it has been argued that the benign effects of global competition and low-cost imports on consumer prices might have led to an underestimation of the stimulating effects of a monetary policy, which is consistent with the preservation of price stability over the medium term, but which can be characterised as accommodative over the long term, as evidenced by buoyant credit and money growth over a prolonged period of time.  [22] A strong and persistent expansion of monetary liquidity could fuel or even trigger an asset price boom. During the bust phase of the asset price cycle, the associated credit crunch might lead to an economic downturn and a negative deviation from the objective of consumer price stability, and possibly even to deflation, which would exacerbate a financial crisis. An environment of abundant monetary liquidity can affect the risk-taking behaviour of investors and financial intermediaries. Ample monetary liquidity and financial market liquidity  [23] could be indicators of the ongoing execution of arbitrage strategies, such as carry trades, and short-termist or myopic “search-for-yield” behaviour, which can temporarily distort the pricing of risk.  [24] It is not low inflation itself but rather low rates of return, which could trigger “searching-for-yield” investment strategies, providing financial market liquidity to previously much less liquid markets and affecting relative asset prices. In fact, ECB research shows that there is evidence that monetary liquidity shocks have played a role in driving asset prices, particularly housing prices across OECD countries, during the boom phase of asset price cycles, and that these shocks have also to explain the negative effects on economic activity during the subsequent bust phase. [25] The intriguing aspect of this hypothesis, and of the associated empirical findings, is that the monetary policy stance might be perfectly appropriate for and consistent with the preservation of price stability over the medium term. Nevertheless, the potential implications for asset price boom-and-bust-cycles could signal that the monetary policy stance could prove accommodative for maintaining price stability in the long run.The jury is still out concerning the final verdict as to which of the two views is right. In my opinion, however, one general conclusion is valid: a monetary policy strategy which carefully monitors money and credit developments is likely to contribute to the detection of potentially destabilising financial imbalances is likely to help detect potentially destabilising financial imbalances at an early stage. Our discussion on how to manage globalisation comes at a difficult moment in time, a challenging period for financial markets and institutions worldwide, and a period of heightened uncertainty about the potential impact of the ongoing reappraisal of risk on the real economy. This makes this joint intellectual effort to understand the underlying mechanisms and forces of globalisation even more topical, and our joint quest to identify ways to manage globalisation even more valuable. In my contribution, focusing on the central banker’s perspective, I argued, first, that globalisation does not fundamentally undermine the effectiveness of monetary policy in preserving price stability. Although the channels through which monetary policy affects economic variables are certainly influenced by globalisation, the respective effects are estimated to be small. Second, there is no doubt that financial globalisation has had positive effects on the efficiency of financial markets, on global risk-sharing and ultimately economic growth worldwide. That said, the current financial market turmoil also revealed a number of weaknesses in the globalised financial system, where tensions in one relatively small market segment in one country can rapidly spread across other markets and countries. One of the lessons to be learnt is that financial market integration across the globe needs to be accompanied by adequate appreciation of risk, effective risk management and sufficient market discipline. In addition, the episode has underscored the benefits of effective coordination and, if necessary, joint action by central banks, as well as closer cooperation and improved information-sharing between financial supervisors and central banks. Third, the experience of the ongoing market turmoil has highlighted the need to deepen our understanding of how globalisation affects the complex and multi-faceted nexus of monetary policy and financial stability. At this juncture, it is more important than ever that central banks continue to pursue their primary objective of price stability and effectively contribute to safeguarding financial stability and preserving confidence.Thank you very much. Adalid, R. and C. Detken (2007), “Liquidity Shocks and Asset Price Boom/Bust Cycles”, European Central Bank Working Paper Series, No. 732.Barro, R. J. and X. Sala-i-Martin (1990), “World Real Interest Rates”, National Bureau of Economic Research Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 5.Bean, C. (2006a), Comments on Ken Rogoff: “Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy” at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 30th Annual Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 26 August.Bean, C. (2006b), “Globalisation and Inflation”, Speech to LSE Economics Society, London School of Economics, 24 October.Bernanke, B. S. (2005), “The Global Savings Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit”, Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, 10 March.Borio, C. and A. Filardo. (2007), “Globalisation and inflation: New cross-country evidence on the global determinants of domestic inflation”, BIS Working Papers No. 227.Borio, C. and P. Lowe (2002), “Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability: Exploring the Nexus”, BIS Working Paper 114. Bank for International Settlements, Basel.Boivin, J. and M.P. Giannoni (2006), “Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(3): 445-462, (January 2003) NBER Working Paper Series, No. 9459.Caballero, R. (2006), “On the Macroeconomics of Asset Shortages”, NBER Working Paper Series, No. 12753.European Central Bank (2007a), Financial Stability Review, June. European Central Bank (2007b), Financial Stability Review, December.European Central Bank (2008), “Globalisation, trade and the euro area macroeconomy”, Monthly Bulletin, January, pp. 75-88 Ferguson, R., P. Hartmann,, F. Panetta, and R. Portes (2007), International Financial Stability, IXth Geneva Report, ICMB, Geneva.Giannone, D., M. Lenza and L. Reichlin (2007), “The Equilibrium Level of the World Real Interest Rate”, paper presented at the First Annual Risk Management Institute Research Conference “Capital Flows and Asset Price: The International Dimension of Risk”, Singapore 6-7 July.Hartmann, P., F. Heider, E. Papaioannou and M. Lo Duca (2007), “The role of financial markets and innovation in productivity and growth in Europe”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 72, SeptemberIhrig, J., S.B. Kamin, D. Lindner and J. Marques (2007), “Some Simple Tests of the Globalization and Inflation Hypothesis”, International Finance Discussion Papers, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, No. 891.Kose, M.A., E. S. Prasad, K. Rogoff and S.-J. Wei (2006), “Financial Globalisation: A Reappraisal”, NBER Working Paper 12484Kose, M. A., E. S. Prasad and M. E. Terrones (2005), “Growth and Volatility in an Era of Globalisations”, IMF Staff Papers, vol. 52, pp. 31-63Kose, M. A., E. S. Prasad, and M. E. Terrones (2006), “How Do Trade and Financial Integration Affect The Relationship Between Growth and Volatility?”, Journal of International Economics, vol. 69, pp. 176-202.Kroszner, R. S. (2007), “Globalization and Capital Markets: Implications for Inflation and the Yield Curve”, Remarks at the Center for Financial Stability (CEF), Buenos Aires, Argentina,16 May.Pain, N., I. Koske and M. Sollie (2006), “Globalisation and inflation in the OECD economies”, OECD Economics Department Working Paper No 52, Pula, G. and F. Skudelny (2007), “The impact of rising imports from low-cost countries on euro area prices and labour markets – some preliminary findings”, paper presented at the ECB conference on “Globalisation and the macroeconomy”, July.Reichlin, L. (2006), Panel remarks at the Thirteenth International Conference “Financial Markets and the Real Economy in a Low Interest Rate Environment” Bank of Japan, Tokyo.Rajan, R. (2005), “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?” NBER Working Paper No. 11728.Rajan, R. (2006), “Monetary Policy and Incentives”, in Fernández de Lis, S. and Restoy, F., Central Banks in the 21st Century, Proceedings of an international conference sponsored by the Banco de España; Madrid, Banco de España.Rogoff, K. (2004), “Globalization and Global Disinflation”, International Monetary Fund, paper prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City conference on “Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy”, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 28-30 August 2003.Rogoff, K. (2006), “Impact of Globalization on Monetary Policy”, Harvard University, paper prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City conference on “The New Economic Geography: Effects and Policy Implications” Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 24-26 August.Woodford, M. (2007), “Globalization and Monetary Control”, Colombia University (prepared for the NBER conference on International Dimensions of Monetary Policy, Barcelona, Spain, June 11-13, 2007).Wu, T. (2006), “Globalization’s Effect on Interest Rates and the Yield Curve”, Economic Letter – Insights from the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Vol. 1, No. 9.[1] See Woodford (2007).[2] See Wu (2006).[3] See Reichlin (2006).[4] See Giannone, Lenza, Reichlin (2007). Barro and Sala-I-Martin (1990) found that real interest rates for seven of the nine OECD countries they investigated mainly depended on world factors for the period 1958-1989.[5] See Ferguson et al. (2007).[6] See Kroszner (2007).[7] See Bean (2006a and 2006b).[8] See Rogoff (2004, 2006). [9] See Borio and Filardo (2007).[10] See Ihrig et al. (2007).[11] See Boivin and Giannoni (2006) and Bean (2005).[12] See ECB (2008); Pain et al (2006) and Pula and Skudelny (2007). [13] See Ferguson et al. (2007), Ch. 9.[14] See Hartmann et al. (2007).[15] See Kose, Prasad, Rogoff and Wei (2006).[16] See Kose, Prasad and Terrones (2005, 2006).[17] The financial market liquidity indicator is constructed to gauge market tightness, depth and resiliency, and liquidity risk premia.[18] The available empirical evidence on how measured financial openness affected the severity of banking crises is somewhat inconclusive. The finance literature argues for a joint consideration of efficiency and stability issues, see Ferguson et al. (2007), ch. 6.3 for references to the literature. [19] See ECB (2007b), Box 7, on the propagation of the sub-prime shock to other markets. [20] See Caballero (2006).[21] See Bernanke (2005).[22] See Borio and Lowe (2002).[23] See ECB (2007a), Box 9 for an elaboration of the measurement of financial market liquidity.[24] See Rajan (2005, 2006).[25] Adalid and Detken (2007). Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",year globalis continu buzzword public debat persist signific certain also due fact multifacet phenomenon yet fulli understood assess globalis encompass broad rang aspect econom social polit cultur intellectu mani relev public polici even though public discours often focus econom consequ globalis integr market associ distribut effect globalis free exchang good servic capit global market also unpreced opportun exchang knowledg idea across globe bridg forum dialogu luxembourg provid excel platform see intellectu facet globalis action like thank governor mersch presid forum invit look forward enrich debat fellow panellist audienc theme year event globalis manag exploit profession compar advantag elabor central bank perspect remark intend address three aspect globalis potenti impact central bank polici first discuss extent globalis may affect conduct effect monetari polici control inflat influenc domest econom activ globalis alter job central bank second explor impact globalis function financi market cours particular pertin issu ongo financi market turmoil potenti implic financi stabil sow wind financi globalis reap whirlwind market turbul third briefli seek shed light link monetari polici financi stabil globalis may affect interrel past central bank polici worldwid play part build imbal global financi market whose correct unwind wit present recent year argu globalis like signific implic conduct effect monetari polici control inflat influenc domest econom activ suggest effect monetari polici could impair consequ impact globalis structur function market product labour financi market would affect extrem disrupt import channel transmiss mechan monetari polici various effect discuss analys number empir studi attempt estim quantit signific simpli put globalis could undermin effect monetari polici result impact domest aggreg demand aggreg suppli channel monetari polici influenc aggreg demand could impair domest interest rate domest aggreg demand increas determin global factor rather domest monetari polici suppli side globalis could affect inflat dynam various way notabl reduc respons domest inflat domest firm margin cost increas make global econom slack rather domest output gap import determin domest inflat pressur possibl influenc trend rate chang term trade regard influenc globalis domest aggreg demand two argument advanc first financi integr world argu global monetari liquid rather domest liquid affect domest interest rate domest econom activ main though exclus effect liquid premia second claim level longerterm domest real interest rate like determin global save invest rather nation compon influenc expect pronounc smaller economi therefor smaller countri cannot affect global suppli liquid signific degre could lose effect control inflat reason howev dubious support theori confirm empir evid exampl twocountri new keynesian model shown provid exchang rate flexibl global monetari factor affect domest price level potenti shortterm effect global output interest sign spillov effect opposit would expect global liquid hypothesi compar loos foreign monetari polici induc depreci foreign currenc negat impact domest demand price home countri main conclus rigor theoret analysi monetari polici affect domest demand even fulli financi integr world even small countri long exchang rate flexibl exchang rate channel play promin role interest rate channel monetari transmiss mechan extent depend relat size countri degre financi market integr result fulli consist basic econom theori thus abil central bank control price develop medium term influenc aggreg demand undermin although role relat import differ transmiss channel might affect increas global financi integr empir evid potenti impact globalis channel monetari transmiss mechan theoret plausibl globalis influenc certain extent key determin longterm interest rate global riskless real interest rate real risk premium moreov inflat expect inflat risk premium may also influenc degre forc globalis though monetari polici across globe certain main factor empir evid euro area well broader sampl oecd countri longterm rate react less chang shortterm rate use global factor seem increas import determin nation real bond yield furthermor comov us german japanes bond yield except high past year interpret find although global forc play import role determin domest longterm interest rate provid suffici evid conclud effect monetari polici control inflat reduc increas signific global factor identifi empir analysi like reflect common trend well similar orient monetari polici success contain inflationari pressur nation monetari polici diverg common orient foster increas competit currenc observ regular like affect central bank still abl influenc aggreg demand preserv price stabil float exchang rate let turn effect globalis aggreg suppli dynam inflat sever effect identifi suggest relat direct other indirect globalis affect inflat dynam various channel influenc respons wage price measur domest slack labour product market affect slope shortterm phillip curv sensit profit margin cyclic factor affect trend product growth caus shift natur rate unemploy nairu make measur global econom slack import determin domest inflationari pressur direct affect trend rate chang relat price import final good intermedi product commod import keep mind various channel potenti effect impact offset also theoret argument empir analys often focus potenti channel thus provid partial pictur elabor effect empir evid euro area econom theori provid unambigu conclus impact globalis slope shortterm phillip curv respons domest inflat measur domest econom slack e g output gap andor deviat unemploy natur rate argument advanc advanc impli globalis would tend make phillip curv flatter steeper kenneth rogoff agu inflat becom respons domest excess demand price rigid reduc economi becom flexibl result increas competit pressur induc globalis proposit measur global econom slack rather domest output gap import determin domest inflat pressur discuss extens hypothesi valid would impli slope shortterm phillip curv depict respons inflat domest excess demand becom flatter thus globalis world argu much stronger monetari polici respons would requir thing equal preserv price stabil medium term presenc advers shock also regard exist robust empir evid solid convinc theoret foundat support claim structur chang taken place empir estim euro area show signific chang slope shortterm phillip curv furthermor would mislead interpret recent observ low correl domest output gap domest inflat countri structur chang shortterm phillip curv reduc correl even lack could simpli consequ effect monetari polici central bank succeed anchor inflat expect price stabil two direct effect globalis world domest inflat dynam visibl part offset relat impact may chang time one hand raw materi basic commod notabl oil sourc energi becom scarcer relat world demand lead substanti upward pressur price see chart exampl brent crude oil price increas almost tenfold last nine year reflect larg extent impact rise demand especi emerg market economi see chart although supplysid factor also play role period hand integr larg reserv lowcost skill labour intern economi increas product manufactur good emerg market economi put downward pressur import price manufactur good well wage demand industri economi consequ price wide rang manufactur good declin sinc reflect unit valu import manufactur product euro area mid virtual level see chart counteract effect global price pressur euro area inflat observ clear take look develop overal harmonis index consum price hicp select compon energi nonenergi industri good see chart price paid consum energi product account approxim euro area privat consumpt surg averag rate per annum follow seri sharp oil price increas period price consum good nonenergi industri good account total privat consumpt increas moder rate per annum averag period environ signific persist chang relat price energi good agricultur product price increas good compar visibl consum relat stabl price mani consum good may therefor advers affect inflat expect consequ crucial monetari polici anchor inflat expect price stabil ensur secondround effect increas energi price commod price price wageset materialis empir evid globalis direct affect consum price inflat advanc economi reveal rather mute impact inflat euro area like percentag point lower per annum result net impact inflationdampen effect noncommod import price inflationaug effect commod import price past decad two effect link part offset reflect impact emerg market economi price manufactur good world commod price size sign net impact inflat advanc economi futur surround uncertainti like chang globalis unfold central bank need adapt monetari polici strategi cope challeng globalis shown rational maintain price stabil primari object ecb mani major central bank strengthen financi globalis least two reason first intern riskshar loosen link domest consumpt domest output optim monetari polici would tend increas relat weight price stabil expens output variabl real consumpt ultim matter social welfar second welfaremaximis weight attribut price stabil also increas intern riskshar obtain mean crossbord hold nomin asset e g noninfl index bond inflat would serious distort effect riskshar interest argument bring second part present potenti implic globalis financi stabil let focus effect globalis function financi market institut potenti implic effect perform central bank task safeguard financi stabil issu import topic pace global financi integr acceler recent year ongo financi market turmoil clear demonstr financi globalis involv increas integr financi market grow presenc crossbord financi institut financi globalis often defin measur extent countri link crossbord financi hold common use indic financi globalis sum countri gross foreign asset liabil proport gdp evolut indic document impress dynam financi globalis sinc mid especi advanc economi lesser extent emerg market develop countri see chart euro area alon ratio sum foreign asset liabil gdp increas year euro launch also impress relev pace financi integr advanc economi much faster trade integr earli onward evidenc ratio sum extern asset liabil sum export import see chart interest ratio rough stabl emerg market economi develop countri period final anoth pertin indic measur extent rapid grow import total crossbord bank asset liabil sinc earli increas fivefold trillion us dollar almost trillion us dollar chart fast pace financi globalis reflect time contribut rapid develop financi market financi integr develop driven sever factor deregul capit liberalis financi innov advanc communic inform technolog factor contribut mutual reinforc manner except growth overal size financi market relat gdp chart consolid bank sector emerg larg complex financi institut also contribut exponenti growth new financi instrument adopt bank origin distribut busi model increas presenc new financi intermediari addit distribut net save flow across globe larg excess save relat domest invest opportun emerg market economi search higher global invest return also contribut fast pace financi globalis develop recent year examin assess effect globalis financi system effici stabil import keep mind role factor e g financi innov new busi model risk manag practic simultan exert signific impact function financi market institut securitis bank loan develop credit risk transfer crt instrument complex structur financ product fundament chang function financi system distribut risk across sector border sinc mid unpreced growth develop issuanc new financi market instrument allow transfer risk across market particip also connect previous relat illiquid asset like bank loan mortgag initi focus transfer market risk credit risk transfer instrument increas gain import sinc respect securitis develop best describ point outstand valu us agenc mortgageback secur grew billion us dollar trillion dollar chart annual securitis trillion us dollar year us billion euro europ area mortgageback secur account bulk total respect credit risk transfer instrument increas notion valu global credit default swap phenomen billion us dollar trillion us dollar period share credit default swap overal deriv market increas chart collateralis debt oblig cdos anoth major type secur use transfer credit risk global issuanc cdos tripl chart one promin featur develop financi system becom much leverag indic ratio total monetari financi asset relat monetari base central bank money effect financi globalis develop effici stabil financi system trend econom growth output financi market volatil let first examin impact effici growth output volatil avail empir evid support view develop financi sector measur financi market size indic featur sophist posit effect effici function product market foster total factor product gain output growth evid impact financi globalis econom growth conclus suffici robust part reflect fact impact condit macroeconom polici pursu well institut regulatori framework place make difficult isol empir estim net contribut moreov impact financi globalis growth may take time becom visibl exert influenc various channel involv indirect effect inde new approach emphasis indirect effect financi globalis growth promot develop financi sector strengthen competit enhanc market disciplin macroeconom polici suggest total impact growth financi globalis indirect effect signific particular advanc economi integr global financi market foster total factor product growth improv riskshar moreov evid financi integr economi absorb shock toler higher level volatil without volatil advers effect growth import issu financi system stabil whether financi globalis key factor reduc volatil increas liquid financi market number year current financi market turmoil global financi market characteris abund liquid inde reach unpreced level financi market liquid concept distinct monetari liquid measur abil market particip undertak transact without trigger larg chang asset price abund financi market liquid period summer associ low market volatil especi equiti bond market chart low risk avers chart low corpor bond yield spread chart credit spread high leverag high market turnov also reflect search yield confid smooth function market composit indic financi market liquid euro area equiti bond credit foreign exchang market construct ecb chart show financi market liquid increas signific sinc rose sharpli remain high level summer similar indic construct bank england uk financi market highlight global dimens phenomenon similar trend argu increas financi market integr liberalis intern capit flow key determin increas market liquid associ declin market volatil care analysi show factor play import role rapid growth new financi instrument increas presenc activ high leverag financi market particip moreov ampl market liquid also reflect increas risk appetit rise leverag recent market develop show abrupt sizeabl increas risk avers caus evapor liquid mani market rise market volatil therefor although financi globalis play role contain market volatil cannot expect domin perman impact broader potenti implic financi globalis stabil financi system real financi shock like propag across border asset class financi integr world one hand obvious augment risk crossbord contagion asymmetr shock rest world crossbord asset hold widespread hand risk weigh posit side coin benefit gain increas intern riskshar mean diversif resili financi asset price negat shock improv market liquid investor base heterogen balanc despit ongo financi turmoil would argu financi integr stabilis influenc global financi system reason mention howev risk assess manag inadequ asset valuat difficult high uncertain incent distort risk financi stabil could increas current financi turmoil provid clear exampl shock relat small segment nation financi market spread global across border across market earli us subprim loan delinqu start rise consequ valu credit product base subprim mortgag rate lower aa start fall two hedg fund bear stearn activ exposur subprim market almost lost capit june rate agenc earli juli announc would downgrad mani assetback secur abss collateralis debt oblig cdos signific reassess expect return structur financ product took place aa aaarat assetback secur ab also start fall valu follow general repric risk see chart tension credit market e g also corpor bond market affect sever countri us e g corpor bond market us europ financi market liquid structur credit product start evapor chart equiti market also affect increas risk avers general flight qualiti consequ inadequ risk manag particular liquid risk manag interbank money market came pressur due complex price structur credit product lack transpar bank exposur invest vehicl heavili need refinanc ab invest time less fulli illiquid advers select problem interbank market led concern system risk bank reluct lend concern counterparti exposur subprim relat asset also uncertainti liquid need august interest rate unsecur money market start rise signific polici rate also shortterm matur indic financi market liquid number market declin dramat sinc august ecb launch seri market oper aim address pressur money market ensur shortterm money market rate remain close ecb polici rate thus contain spillov effect financi system real economi oper succeed stabilis shortterm interbank rate reduc tension longterm money market money market pressur remain elev level global decemb chart global respons call form joint action major central bank advanc economi includ ecb provid us dollar liquid financi institut also outsid us overal central bank oper posit impact money market worldwid contribut mitig effect turmoil financi system economi howev persist uncertainti financi market action cannot address intend address impli pressur longerterm money market remain although signific reduc level sinc decemb european central bank continu stand readi act swift decis manner order ensur order function money market under main caus financi market turmoil key weak function financi system reveal appropri respons market particip policymak full diagnosi caus weak yet complet inde possibl market adjust still ongo nevertheless would like highlight four area also pertin issu financi integr develop discuss first under caus trigger found price dynam us hous market excess shortcom practic us subprim mortgag market main determin factor financi market turbul one properti price overvalu characteris previous episod emphasis kenneth rogoff second weak function market structur financ product includ valuat uncertainti due complex mani product imperfect inform avail under asset characterist inadequ appreci investor embed risk excess relianc rate product credit rate agenc third weak implement originateanddistribut model bank chain distribut acquisit credit risk shortcom includ inappropri incent structur bank well financi entiti agent securitis process foster moral hazard contribut inadequ assess manag credit fundingliquid risk fourth role featur new financi entiti offbal sheet conduit structur invest vehicl siv link bank manag financ play key role transmiss tension structur financ product market money market result matur mismatch balanc sheet associ fund liquid risk creation invest vehicl associ substanti offbal sheet exposur bank structur credit product unintend consequ regulatori arbitrag reflect poor assess manag fund market liquid risk well reput risk face number bank overal weak function financi system reveal financi market turmoil lead general conclus financi integr develop accompani adequ appreci risk effect risk manag suffici market disciplin diverg financi develop one hand suffici disciplin effect risk manag bridg done measur stifl financi innov market effici action institut framework encourag prudent behaviour adequ risk assess manag specif securitis bank loan asset origin distribut model abandon securitis new bank model entail econom social benefit contribut better alloc financi resourc wider diversif risk across market frontier time evid bank model securitis process strengthen improv incent structur risk assess manag practic increas transpar similar structur financ market order revitalis requir action address valuat problem increas transpar disclosur enhanc understand assess embed risk improv practic agenc financi entiti involv creation rate distribut product standardis structur financ product could facilit market function general risk manag system practic bank financi institut improv requir better extens stresstest order enabl better assess potenti impact tail risk correl risk action need enhanc market disciplin strengthen resili financi system current examin market particip policymak recent experi provid financi institut market particip strong incent address weak reveal various way includ via improv transpar exposur greater disclosur risk product process financi regul supervisor also examin way strengthen resili financi system robust framework ensur adequ capit liquid buffer encourag market disciplin promot effect risk manag global level financi stabil forum present report g minist governor april includ recommend action achiev object impact financi globalis unfold ongo financi turmoil key factor contribut boost market liquid reduc market volatil foster financi develop preced year moreov facilit propag shock spread subprim relat risk europ result acquisit larg exposur european bank structur financ product base bank asset origin across atlant european bank major involv dollar assetback commerci paper abcp market certain point time account fund said would wrong conclud financi globalis blame financi turmoil cannot consid respons fundament caus key weak identifi earlier result associ mispric risk mismanag asset liabil financi institut contrari financi globalis contribut thing equal intern riskshar cushion impact shock nation financi system economi also facilit boost capit buffer restor balanc sheet bank weaken turmoil recent financi market episod highlight import implic financi integr central bank use effect cooper coordin action central bank manag liquid ensur effici function interbank money market also clear shown benefit closer cooper improv informationshar financi supervisor central bank enhanc interact would contribut better assess potenti system implic financi shock assist address market tension problem face individu financi institut one final import issu would like briefli consid interrel globalis monetari polici financi stabil plausibl argu globalis play import role determin low level world real interest rate exampl result emerg market save main invest develop economi due lack invest opportun respect home market induc declin equilibrium global real interest rate monetari polici accommod low nomin interest rate obvious remain risk associ potenti abrupt unwind global imbal invest strategi strong influenc low interest rate environ monetari polici play role emerg global imbal associ financi stabil risk altern argu benign effect global competit lowcost import consum price might led underestim stimul effect monetari polici consist preserv price stabil medium term characteris accommod long term evidenc buoyant credit money growth prolong period time strong persist expans monetari liquid could fuel even trigger asset price boom bust phase asset price cycl associ credit crunch might lead econom downturn negat deviat object consum price stabil possibl even deflat would exacerb financi crisi environ abund monetari liquid affect risktak behaviour investor financi intermediari ampl monetari liquid financi market liquid could indic ongo execut arbitrag strategi carri trade shorttermist myopic searchforyield behaviour temporarili distort price risk low inflat rather low rate return could trigger searchingforyield invest strategi provid financi market liquid previous much less liquid market affect relat asset price fact ecb research show evid monetari liquid shock play role drive asset price particular hous price across oecd countri boom phase asset price cycl shock also explain negat effect econom activ subsequ bust phase intrigu aspect hypothesi associ empir find monetari polici stanc might perfect appropri consist preserv price stabil medium term nevertheless potenti implic asset price boomandbustcycl could signal monetari polici stanc could prove accommod maintain price stabil long run juri still concern final verdict two view right opinion howev one general conclus valid monetari polici strategi care monitor money credit develop like contribut detect potenti destabilis financi imbal like help detect potenti destabilis financi imbal earli stage discuss manag globalis come difficult moment time challeng period financi market institut worldwid period heighten uncertainti potenti impact ongo reapprais risk real economi make joint intellectu effort understand under mechan forc globalis even topic joint quest identifi way manag globalis even valuabl contribut focus central banker perspect argu first globalis fundament undermin effect monetari polici preserv price stabil although channel monetari polici affect econom variabl certain influenc globalis respect effect estim small second doubt financi globalis posit effect effici financi market global riskshar ultim econom growth worldwid said current financi market turmoil also reveal number weak globalis financi system tension one relat small market segment one countri rapid spread across market countri one lesson learnt financi market integr across globe need accompani adequ appreci risk effect risk manag suffici market disciplin addit episod underscor benefit effect coordin necessari joint action central bank well closer cooper improv informationshar financi supervisor central bank third experi ongo market turmoil highlight need deepen understand globalis affect complex multifacet nexus monetari polici financi stabil junctur import ever central bank continu pursu primari object price stabil effect contribut safeguard financi stabil preserv confid thank much adalid r c detken liquid shock asset price boombust cycl european central bank work paper seri barro r j x salaimartin world real interest rate nation bureau econom research macroeconom annual vol bean c comment ken rogoff impact global monetari polici feder reserv bank kansa citi th annual econom symposium jackson hole wyom august bean c b globalis inflat speech lse econom societi london school econom octob bernank b global save glut u current account deficit sandridg lectur virginia associ econom richmond march borio c filardo globalis inflat new crosscountri evid global determin domest inflat bis work paper borio c p low asset price financi monetari stabil explor nexus bis work paper bank intern settlement basel boivin j m p giannoni monetari polici becom effect review econom statist januari nber work paper seri caballero r macroeconom asset shortag nber work paper seri european central bank financi stabil review june european central bank b financi stabil review decemb european central bank globalis trade euro area macroeconomi month bulletin januari pp ferguson r p hartmann f panetta r port intern financi stabil ixth geneva report icmb geneva giannon d m lenza l reichlin equilibrium level world real interest rate paper present first annual risk manag institut research confer capit flow asset price intern dimens risk singapor juli hartmann p f heider e papaioannou m lo duca role financi market innov product growth europ ecb occasion paper septemberihrig j b kamin d lindner j marqu simpl test global inflat hypothesi intern financ discuss paper board governor feder reserv system kose m e prasad k rogoff j wei financi globalis reapprais nber work paper kose m e prasad m e terron growth volatil era globalis imf staff paper vol pp kose m e prasad m e terron trade financi integr affect relationship growth volatil journal intern econom vol pp kroszner r global capit market implic inflat yield curv remark center financi stabil cef bueno air argentina may pain n kosk m solli globalis inflat oecd economi oecd econom depart work paper pula g f skudelni impact rise import lowcost countri euro area price labour market preliminari find paper present ecb confer globalis macroeconomi juli reichlin l panel remark thirteenth intern confer financi market real economi low interest rate environ bank japan tokyo rajan r financi develop made world riskier nber work paper rajan r monetari polici incent fernández de lis restoy f central bank st centuri proceed intern confer sponsor banco de españa madrid banco de españa rogoff k global global disinfl intern monetari fund paper prepar feder reserv bank kansa citi confer monetari polici uncertainti adapt chang economi jackson hole wyom august rogoff k impact global monetari polici harvard univers paper prepar feder reserv bank kansa citi confer new econom geographi effect polici implic jackson hole wyom august woodford m global monetari control colombia univers prepar nber confer intern dimens monetari polici barcelona spain june wu global effect interest rate yield curv econom letter insight feder reserv bank dalla vol see woodford see wu see reichlin see giannon lenza reichlin barro salaimartin found real interest rate seven nine oecd countri investig main depend world factor period see ferguson et al see kroszner see bean b see rogoff see borio filardo see ihrig et al see boivin giannoni bean see ecb pain et al pula skudelni see ferguson et al ch see hartmann et al see kose prasad rogoff wei see kose prasad terron financi market liquid indic construct gaug market tight depth resili liquid risk premia avail empir evid measur financi open affect sever bank crise somewhat inconclus financ literatur argu joint consider effici stabil issu see ferguson et al ch refer literatur see ecb b box propag subprim shock market see caballero see bernank see borio low see ecb box elabor measur financi market liquid see rajan adalid detken reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en