Jean-Claude Trichet: Today’s financial institutions and tomorrow’s monetary order,20-11-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,2332,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,It is always a pleasure to join you at the annual Frankfurt European Banking Congress. I noted that the organisers have chosen as title: “After the crisis”. I understand that the mood in the financial system is one of relief. But as of today, it is too early to declare the crisis over. Recent financial developments have been more benign, it is true. However a significant volume of official support underlies these developments. Nobody knows this better than financial institutions and markets themselves. The total amount of outstanding ECB refinancing is around 60% larger than it was before the financial market turmoil. This reflects also the need for the ECB to “intermediate” parts of the money market. Euro area governments for their part have committed 26% of GDP to supporting the financial sector. This assistance has come in the form of guarantees, capital injections and asset support. The magnitude of support is without precedent, and all participants in financial markets should be conscious of that. It has been extended on behalf of the general public, and for the benefit of the overall economy. Banks are an important part of the economy. The support has been given for their role in the economy, not for the banks by themselves. We also have to understand the concern of our democracies as regards compensation and bonuses. Principles have been agreed upon at the level of the international community. They were worked out by the Financial Stability Board and approved by the G20. Let us apply rigorously those principles, under the control of the banking supervisory authorities. The wrong incentives to embark in absurd risks and dangerous short-term ventures have to be eliminated. Challenges to guard against excesses are as old as mankind. I quote Frankfurt’s most famous son: „ Die Hauptsache ist, daß man lerne, sich selbst zu beherrschen. Wollte ich mich ungehindert gehen lassen, so läge es wohl in mir, mich selbst und meine Umgebung zugrunde zu richten.“ One could translate this as follows. “The most important issue is to learn self-restraint. If I wanted to lavishly let myself go, I could well destroy myself and my environment.” Goethe made this remark in 1830. I am sure he would have repeated it today. * * *Three points appear essential regarding the banking sector.  First, banks need to strengthen their balance sheets. They need to become self-reliant and be able to stand on their own two feet. The authorities can – and have – provided considerable temporary support, but in a market economy we cannot manage the financial sector or provide exceptional support indefinitely.Banks must rebuild their capital base. There are many ways to do so. The improved capital markets offer opportunities to raise funds including equity. Profits earned should be used – as priority – to build capital and reserves, rather than to be paid out as dividends or undue compensation.  Second, banks should lend, because the magnitude of public support has been provided for this purpose, and the strengthened balance sheets will allow them to lend. Banks should strive to maintain their supply of loans. Most recently, in the third quarter of this year, the annual growth of loans to non-financial corporations continued to decline, while the annual growth of loans to households remained broadly unchanged. This pattern of loan dynamics is broadly in line with past regularities around business cycle turning points.  But the latest ECB bank lending survey suggests that, while the peak in the tightening of banks' credit standards is behind us, credit standards remain considerably tighter than prior to the turmoil. It will be particularly important that banks intensify their efforts to expand their supply of loans once loan demand picks up in the recovery.  Third, compensation and bonuses must remain contained. Otherwise, we would take risks that Goethe already described. When necessary, banks should take advantage of the available government support to achieve these goals. From this perspective, I will interpret the conference theme – “After the crisis” – as an appeal to look forward and draw lessons for the future from our experience of the past two years.* * *I would like to outline now what measures we, as the central bank of the world’s second-largest economy, have taken in the crisis, and how and why we have designed these measures. To illustrate, I would like to draw on a medical analogy, identifying three lessons for how we should collectively care for the health of the financial system going forward. First, once a patient falls seriously ill, emergency medication is required. Strong and invasive painkillers may have to be administered. Contagion must be avoided. Similarly, a global financial crisis of first magnitude requires prompt and decisive policy action, possibly of an unprecedented nature. When this crisis began, the European Central Bank was in the vanguard of the policy response, taking early and bold action to address financial turmoil. During the crisis, our exceptional measures – the ECB’s “enhanced credit support” – served to prevent a systemic liquidity crisis, enabled banks to continue functioning and helped to restore confidence.  Second, medical experience tells us that, over time, the continued administration of strong painkillers can be harmful. They can create dependence - or even addiction - for the recipients. Such medicine cannot be a permanent solution. It would eventually create new problems. By analogy, the exceptional support provided by central banks to the private sector must not degenerate into long-term dependence of the private sector on such support. For that reason, the current non-standard monetary policy measures will have to be progressively phased out. Enhanced credit support is not for eternity. Financial institutions must prepare themselves for an eventual withdrawal, which, as I have said on behalf of the Governing Council, will be timely and gradual. Third, looking forward, we know that “prevention is better than cure”. “Preventive medicine” reduces the risk of future recurrence of the illness.Recent experience has offered important insights into how public policies and private incentives can be improved so as to reduce the chances of recurrence. Through preventive medicine, we must develop a fitter and healthier financial system. So let me describe in more detail: how we have administered the “central bank medicine” to the financial system; how we envisage continuing the treatment going forward; and what lessons we are drawing for the future design of a preventive framework. It is natural to start with the “emergency treatment” that we have provided to the financial system throughout the financial crisis. The alertness of the ECB was reflected in its actions from the very moment that financial tension first emerged. In August 2007 the ECB was the first central bank to respond, acting within hours. In the ensuing months, we changed the timing and maturity of our liquidity provision, so as to support the functioning of the money market. In addition, we offered foreign currency liquidity to our counterparties. The intensification of the crisis in mid-September 2008 brought soaring credit spreads, dramatic declines in trading and a spike in volatility. In short, the global financial system came close to seizing up. Central banks stepped into the breach, addressing this unprecedented market failure. The ECB was in the vanguard, acting to contain these tensions through both standard and non-standard policy measures.In full consistency with our mandate to maintain price stability, the Governing Council reduced the ECB’s key interest rates rapidly. The current very low level of interest rates is unprecedented throughout the euro area. Together with our credible anchoring of inflation expectations, these policy actions have resulted in a considerable easing of nominal and real monetary conditions in the euro area.Moreover, we have gone beyond standard interest rate cuts by adopting several “non-standard” monetary policy measures. As I have described in the past, collectively these measures embody our policy of “enhanced credit support”: fixed-rate full allotment; expansion of collateral; lengthening maturities of operations; liquidity provision in foreign currencies; and financial market support through a measured but significant covered bonds purchase programme. This policy has been designed to support the flow of credit over and above what could be achieved through interest rate cuts alone. Emergency treatment and strong medicines are sometimes necessary. But, if their use is prolonged, they can lead to dependence and even addiction. Eventually, the administration of painkillers must be stopped if patients are to get back on their own two feet. This brings me to the exit from our non-standard monetary policy measures. The rationale for exit from these measures is the inverse of the rationale for their implementation. We have introduced exceptional measures under exceptional circumstances. These measures will have to be unwound when the situation normalises and the rationale for the measures fades away. The cornerstone of our exit strategy is its link to our primary objective of price stability. Our actions throughout the crisis have been taken resolutely with this primary objective in mind. Thus, any non-standard measure whose continuation would pose a threat to the achievement of price stability must be undone promptly and unequivocally. As I said on behalf of the Governing Council, looking ahead, not all our liquidity measures will be needed to the same extent as in the past. Accordingly, we will make sure that the extraordinary liquidity measures taken are phased out in a timely and gradual fashion and that the liquidity provided is absorbed in order to counter effectively any threat to price stability over the medium to longer term. By so doing, we will continue to ensure a firm anchoring of medium-term inflation expectations. Such anchoring is indispensable to supporting sustainable growth and employment and contributing to financial stability. The financial system and individual institutions within it must act now to ensure that a future removal of central bank support can be managed without painful “withdrawal symptoms”. The overriding objective of someone recovering from a severe illness is not to suffer a relapse. Unfortunately, there is no way of guaranteeing the avoidance of illness. But “preventive medicine” is crucial in reducing the risk of recurrence. We have to develop a new preventive framework to minimise the risk of recurrence. This framework will have both monetary policy and regulatory dimensions. Recent experience has reopened the debate about whether central banks should use interest rates to “lean against the wind” of asset price surges. Prior to the crisis, conventional wisdom was sceptical about such an approach for three main reasons: asset price misalignments or “bubbles” were seen as difficult to identify in real time; it was doubted that interest rate increases of a plausible magnitude could contain surging asset prices once these have achieved a momentum of their own; and third, it has been argued that any damage to the economy stemming from an asset price correction can be contained by prompt and aggressive monetary policy easing. With these considerations in mind, a “wait-and-see” approach was seen as preferable when addressing asset price surges.Having spoken on these issues in the past, I do not wish to enter into a detailed discussion of these arguments today. I only want to emphasise that recent experience has demonstrated the limitations of a wait-and-see approach. Unprecedented policy action in response to the financial crisis could not prevent a sharp fall in economic activity, with all the consequences for the labour market, public finances and the society as a whole. Moreover, a wait-and-see approach risks creating moral hazard. What is required is a more symmetric approach: one that leans against the emergence of asset price booms as well as dealing with the consequences of asset price busts. By encouraging more responsible behaviour on the part of investors, such an approach should make such cycles of boom-bust less likely. But substantial practical questions remain. Clearly, central banks should not target, nor react mechanically to, asset prices. Judgement is necessary in addressing asset price dynamics within an overall framework geared to price stability.At the ECB, our monetary policy strategy – with its medium-term orientation and focus on monetary and credit developments – offers such a framework. It ensures that we consider the implications for price developments at longer horizons of financial imbalances and asset price misalignments, which may cumulate slowly. Therefore, while vindication is a strong word, we feel encouraged as regards our monetary policy strategy, whose underlying analysis we continuously deepen. Let me mention that a number of institutional reforms to the supervisory framework within the European Union are currently being finalised. We welcome the new macro-prudential aspects of this framework. They will take concrete form in the creation of the European Systemic Risk Board. The ECB and the EU national central banks stand ready to provide the risk board with their full support. The Systemic Risk Board will endeavour to provide early warnings and issue recommendations that will help to prevent a renewed build-up of excessive risk in the financial system as a whole. Such warnings would have been useful in the past: they represent a crucial part of the preventive framework for the future.While financial liberalisation, deregulation and innovation all have the potential to make our economies more productive and more resilient, the financial sector must not forget that it is to serve the real economy, not the other way around. This, above all, requires a change in mentality within the financial industry itself. Specifically, the financial industry has to increase transparency, strengthen its management of liquidity and risk, and make its business models more robust. As I mentioned, while maintaining the flow of finance to the real economy, financial institutions must continue to strengthen their balance sheets, by improving their capital and funding positions.The future will no doubt bring further challenges. As concerns the authorities, we will continue to be alert and vigilant, as in the past. And our 330 million fellow citizens in the euro area will surely not tolerate a relapse into excessive risk-taking at the taxpayer’s expense. Therefore, the financial sector has to secure its future in a responsible and sustainable way. Thank you very much for your attention.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen alway pleasur join annual frankfurt european bank congress note organis chosen titl crisi understand mood financi system one relief today earli declar crisi recent financi develop benign true howev signific volum offici support under develop nobodi know better financi institut market total amount outstand ecb refinanc around larger financi market turmoil reflect also need ecb intermedi part money market euro area govern part commit gdp support financi sector assist come form guarante capit inject asset support magnitud support without preced particip financi market conscious extend behalf general public benefit overal economi bank import part economi support given role economi bank also understand concern democraci regard compens bonus principl agre upon level intern communiti work financi stabil board approv g let us appli rigor principl control bank supervisori author wrong incent embark absurd risk danger shortterm ventur elimin challeng guard excess old mankind quot frankfurt famous son die hauptsach ist daß man lern sich selbst zu beherrschen wollt ich mich ungehindert gehen lassen läge es wohl mir mich selbst und mein umgebung zugrund zu richten one could translat follow import issu learn selfrestraint want lavish let go could well destroy environ goeth made remark sure would repeat today three point appear essenti regard bank sector first bank need strengthen balanc sheet need becom selfreli abl stand two feet author provid consider temporari support market economi cannot manag financi sector provid except support indefinit bank must rebuild capit base mani way improv capit market offer opportun rais fund includ equiti profit earn use prioriti build capit reserv rather paid dividend undu compens second bank lend magnitud public support provid purpos strengthen balanc sheet allow lend bank strive maintain suppli loan recent third quarter year annual growth loan nonfinanci corpor continu declin annual growth loan household remain broad unchang pattern loan dynam broad line past regular around busi cycl turn point latest ecb bank lend survey suggest peak tighten bank credit standard behind us credit standard remain consider tighter prior turmoil particular import bank intensifi effort expand suppli loan loan demand pick recoveri third compens bonus must remain contain otherwis would take risk goeth alreadi describ necessari bank take advantag avail govern support achiev goal perspect interpret confer theme crisi appeal look forward draw lesson futur experi past two year would like outlin measur central bank world secondlargest economi taken crisi design measur illustr would like draw medic analog identifi three lesson collect care health financi system go forward first patient fall serious ill emerg medic requir strong invas painkil may administ contagion must avoid similar global financi crisi first magnitud requir prompt decis polici action possibl unpreced natur crisi began european central bank vanguard polici respons take earli bold action address financi turmoil crisi except measur ecb enhanc credit support serv prevent system liquid crisi enabl bank continu function help restor confid second medic experi tell us time continu administr strong painkil harm creat depend even addict recipi medicin cannot perman solut would eventu creat new problem analog except support provid central bank privat sector must degener longterm depend privat sector support reason current nonstandard monetari polici measur progress phase enhanc credit support etern financi institut must prepar eventu withdraw said behalf govern council time gradual third look forward know prevent better cure prevent medicin reduc risk futur recurr ill recent experi offer import insight public polici privat incent improv reduc chanc recurr prevent medicin must develop fitter healthier financi system let describ detail administ central bank medicin financi system envisag continu treatment go forward lesson draw futur design prevent framework natur start emerg treatment provid financi system throughout financi crisi alert ecb reflect action moment financi tension first emerg august ecb first central bank respond act within hour ensu month chang time matur liquid provis support function money market addit offer foreign currenc liquid counterparti intensif crisi midseptemb brought soar credit spread dramat declin trade spike volatil short global financi system came close seiz central bank step breach address unpreced market failur ecb vanguard act contain tension standard nonstandard polici measur full consist mandat maintain price stabil govern council reduc ecb key interest rate rapid current low level interest rate unpreced throughout euro area togeth credibl anchor inflat expect polici action result consider eas nomin real monetari condit euro area moreov gone beyond standard interest rate cut adopt sever nonstandard monetari polici measur describ past collect measur embodi polici enhanc credit support fixedr full allot expans collater lengthen matur oper liquid provis foreign currenc financi market support measur signific cover bond purchas programm polici design support flow credit could achiev interest rate cut alon emerg treatment strong medicin sometim necessari use prolong lead depend even addict eventu administr painkil must stop patient get back two feet bring exit nonstandard monetari polici measur rational exit measur invers rational implement introduc except measur except circumst measur unwound situat normalis rational measur fade away cornerston exit strategi link primari object price stabil action throughout crisi taken resolut primari object mind thus nonstandard measur whose continu would pose threat achiev price stabil must undon prompt unequivoc said behalf govern council look ahead liquid measur need extent past accord make sure extraordinari liquid measur taken phase time gradual fashion liquid provid absorb order counter effect threat price stabil medium longer term continu ensur firm anchor mediumterm inflat expect anchor indispens support sustain growth employ contribut financi stabil financi system individu institut within must act ensur futur remov central bank support manag without pain withdraw symptom overrid object someon recov sever ill suffer relaps unfortun way guarante avoid ill prevent medicin crucial reduc risk recurr develop new prevent framework minimis risk recurr framework monetari polici regulatori dimens recent experi reopen debat whether central bank use interest rate lean wind asset price surg prior crisi convent wisdom sceptic approach three main reason asset price misalign bubbl seen difficult identifi real time doubt interest rate increas plausibl magnitud could contain surg asset price achiev momentum third argu damag economi stem asset price correct contain prompt aggress monetari polici eas consider mind waitandse approach seen prefer address asset price surg spoken issu past wish enter detail discuss argument today want emphasis recent experi demonstr limit waitandse approach unpreced polici action respons financi crisi could prevent sharp fall econom activ consequ labour market public financ societi whole moreov waitandse approach risk creat moral hazard requir symmetr approach one lean emerg asset price boom well deal consequ asset price bust encourag respons behaviour part investor approach make cycl boombust less like substanti practic question remain clear central bank target react mechan asset price judgement necessari address asset price dynam within overal framework gear price stabil ecb monetari polici strategi mediumterm orient focus monetari credit develop offer framework ensur consid implic price develop longer horizon financi imbal asset price misalign may cumul slowli therefor vindic strong word feel encourag regard monetari polici strategi whose under analysi continu deepen let mention number institut reform supervisori framework within european union current finalis welcom new macroprudenti aspect framework take concret form creation european system risk board ecb eu nation central bank stand readi provid risk board full support system risk board endeavour provid earli warn issu recommend help prevent renew buildup excess risk financi system whole warn would use past repres crucial part prevent framework futur financi liberalis deregul innov potenti make economi product resili financi sector must forget serv real economi way around requir chang mental within financi industri specif financi industri increas transpar strengthen manag liquid risk make busi model robust mention maintain flow financ real economi financi institut must continu strengthen balanc sheet improv capit fund posit futur doubt bring challeng concern author continu alert vigil past million fellow citizen euro area sure toler relaps excess risktak taxpay expens therefor financi sector secur futur respons sustain way thank much attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en