Vítor Constâncio: Thomas Philippon’s contribution to macro-finance,03-11-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,1916,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,I am delighted to be here today to award the 2013 Germán Bernácer Prize to Thomas Philippon, Professor of Finance at the Stern School of Business at New York University. [1] Thomas Philippon is a renowned scholar with a wide-ranging research agenda, both theoretical and empirical. The numerous prizes he has won throughout his career, including “best paper” awards in several top journals, speak loudly about the academic quality of his contributions. Thomas’s research – being right at the intersection between macroeconomics and finance – is also highly policy-relevant, not least from a central banker’s perspective, as I will try to highlight today. In fact, many central banks and the ECB in particular have devoted considerable attention and actively contributed to the burgeoning literature on macro-finance. The financial crisis underscored the need for a better understanding of the linkages between the health of the financial sector and the performance of the real economy. Promoting economic research in this field is an essential step in the process of developing effective policies to ensure the stability of the financial sector and, ultimately, to foster economic growth. A prime example of this has been the Macro-prudential Research Network (MaRs), where researchers from the European System of Central Banks closely collaborated with experts from academia. The MaRs network was launched to develop core conceptual frameworks, models and tools providing research support to improve macro-prudential supervision in the EU. Its work, which was formally concluded last June, is summarised in a public report and represents a fine example of policy-relevant research. [2] To foster a constant communication with academics, the ECB also regularly organises seminars, conferences and workshops. These enable researchers, policy-makers and practitioners to meet and discuss the latest research findings and their implications for policy. In addition, to stimulate research at the highest academic standards, the ECB invites leading scholars to visit and conduct their research at the ECB, for example via the Wim Duisenberg Fellowship, and offers support to young researchers by funding five Lamfalussy Fellowships every year. Thomas Philippon’s contributions represent an excellent example of policy-relevant research. I will consider two main areas of his research which I find particularly interesting: the design of optimal interventions and the efficiency of the financial sector. In his 2012 paper, published as the lead article in the American Economic Review, Thomas and his co-author Vasiliki Skreta study the design of optimal public interventions in debt markets. The intervention aims at restoring an efficient level of investment when productive investments are forgone because firms face unfairly high interest rates due to adverse selection. [3] The topic of the paper was – and still is – very timely since asymmetric information played a crucial role in the collapse of the financial markets in the autumn of 2008. [4] Thomas Philippon’s paper identifies some of the key issues associated with the intervention. In particular, he analyses the interaction between the intervention and the conditions that firms face in the market. Decisions by firms to participate in a support programme are influenced by these conditions – how difficult it is to raise funds from the market. At the same time, a firm’s acceptance of public assistance may be perceived as a “bad” signal, thus limiting its incentive to participate. This is the problem of the stigma attached to support programmes. The paper spells out two clear implications for policy. First, it provides robust conceptual support to the idea that the choice of intervention depends crucially on the nature of the frictions and that it should resemble the contract used by market participants. For example, in the case of a freeze in a debt market due to adverse selection, the optimal intervention requires debt instruments, such as direct lending or debt guarantees. Second, it highlights that the stigma associated with the intervention can be a relevant issue and the design of a programme should take this into account. The ECB had to deal with this issue, for example, in the context of the first two longer-term refinancing operations announced in December 2011. When some bankers raised concerns that there might be stigma attached to the ECB’s programme, we said that the decision to accept long-term loans from the ECB should have been seen as a rational business decision and not as a sign of bank distress. [5] The importance of clearly identifying the nature of the frictions leading to the market failures before designing the intervention is also emphasised in another contribution by Thomas Philippon. In his 2013 paper in the Journal of Finance written with Philipp Schnabl, he characterises the optimal intervention in a financial industry plagued by the debt overhang problem. [6] When banks are financed with too much debt, they forgo productive investments, i.e. lending, because in the event of bankruptcy the debt holders would appropriate most of the cash flows. Thomas Philippon and his co-author show that in this case the optimal intervention consists of capital injections against preferred stock (plus warrants) and it is conditional on sufficient bank participation. This design makes it possible to restore the efficient level of lending by providing capital to banks, and at the same time minimises the cost of intervention by controlling for the potential opportunistic behaviours of banks. In particular, the authors highlight two types of opportunistic behaviours induced by the intervention. First, since banks that do not directly participate may benefit from the overall improvement in the market conditions, a free rider problem arises. Therefore, intervention should be conditional on the participation of a critical mass of banks. Second, if the conditions are very favourable, banks may choose strategically to participate in the programme, thus increasing its overall cost. Hence, it is paramount that the intervention entails some costs for the current shareholders.I don’t need to stress how relevant these issues became, especially in the aftermath of the financial crisis, when massive intervention in the banking industry had imposed very large costs on Europe’s taxpayers and had significant consequences for the sovereigns. Indeed, a key concern for policy-makers is that the large support offered to the financial sector may spur opportunistic behaviour and generally distort financial institutions’ risk-taking incentive, possibly magnifying the costs of the intervention while reducing its effectiveness. Thomas Philippon’s analysis is timely and tackles a very relevant issue as new rules for intervention and resolution of banks are currently being implemented. The new EU rules surrounding bank resolution, which are founded on a strong change of culture – from easy public bailouts to a new culture of private bailing-in [7] – clearly go in the direction of preventing these distortions, while retaining the possibility of direct recapitalisation to safeguard financial stability. [8]The new resolution framework that is going to be implemented in Europe will help to support a sustainable growth of the financial sector by inducing financial institutions to internalise the negative spillovers originating from their failures. Thomas Philippon and his co-authors – among whom is the winner of the 2011 Germán Bernácer Prize, Lasse Heje Pedersen – have also contributed to the literature on systemic risk, a topic of particular policy relevance in which the ECB has also invested considerable research efforts. [9] In this paper, the authors argue that a financial institution’s contribution to systemic risk might be measured by its propensity to be undercapitalised when the system as a whole is undercapitalised – the “systemic expected shortfall”. They also advocate the introduction of a “tax” proportionate to each bank’s systemic expected shortfall which should cover losses in the event of a crisis. Let me now turn to Thomas’s second research area, namely dealing with the efficiency of the financial sector. The crisis revived the debate about the optimal size of the financial industry and the finance-growth nexus. Often, and especially at the beginning of the recent crisis, public opinion has blamed the excessive growth of the financial industry and the extremely advantageous remuneration packages in the sector. One argument in the debate against the traditional finance-growth paradigm is that the high wages may draw talent away from other productive sectors in the economy since financial and non-financial sectors compete for the same scarce supply of human capital. [10] Thus, an excessive growth of the financial sector may not be fully desirable. Thomas Philippon formally analyses this trade-off in his (2010) AEJ Macro paper and discusses the implementation of corrective taxes and subsidies to guarantee the optimal allocation of resources between the financial and the productive sectors. [11]Thomas Philippon’s paper published in the Quarterly Journal of Economics in 2012 [12] analyses the allocation and compensation of human capital in the financial industry. Together with his co-author Ariell Reshef, he documents the pattern in wages and skill intensity in the financial industry in the US between 1909 and 2006. The authors show that this pattern is non-monotonic. High compensations in banking and the ability of the financial industry to attract the most skilled workers are not permanent features of this industry. As the paper shows, changes in financial regulation are important determinants of these patterns. Tighter regulation tends to lead to an outflow of resources from the financial sector. This line of research points to the wide range of subjects that interest Thomas Philippon already shown in his 2007 book “Un capitalisme d´héritiers: la crise française du travail” [13] where he musters a lot of empirical evidence to show that the labour crisis in France stems from bad employers-employees relations associated with a system that “preserves inheritance, direct or sociological”. This capacity to link serious economic research with practical social problems is yet another sign of the excellence achieved by Thomas in his body of work. I am confident that Thomas Philippon will continue making extraordinary contributions to this and other research areas in the coming years. I extend my sincerest congratulations to him for winning the 2013 Germán Bernácer Prize.[1]I wish to thank Angela Maddaloni and Agnese Leonello, from the Directorate General Research, for their help in preparing this speech.[2]Available at https://www.ecb.europa.eu/events/pdf/conferences/140623/MaRs_report.pdf[3]Philippon, T., and V. Skreta, (2012) “Optimal Interventions in Markets with Adverse Selection”, American Economic Review, 102(1), 1-28.[4]See, for example, Heider, F., M. Hoerova, and C. Holthausen, (2009) “ Liquidity hoarding and interbank market spreads: the role of counterparty risk”, ECB Working Paper No 1126 on the role of asymmetric information in the interbank market freeze during the recent financial crisis. Moreover, the de Larosière report pointed to the lack of transparency as being one of the causes of the financial crisis (EU Commission, 2009).[5]See the Financial Times article “Draghi attacks bankers over ECB fears” from 9 February 2012.[6]Philippon, T., and P. Schnabl, (2013) “Efficient Recapitalization”, Journal of Finance, 68(1), 1-42.[7]See speech by Vítor Constâncio: Banking Union: meaning and implications for the future of banking at the Banking Union Conference, Navarra University, Madrid 24 April 2014.[8]See the opening speech entitled “The implications of bail-in rules for bank activity and stability” by Benoît Cœuré at the conference “ Financing the recovery after the crisis – the roles of bank profitability, stability and regulation”, held at Bocconi University on 30 September 2013.[9]Acharya, V., L. H. Pedersen, T. Philippon and M. Richardson, (2010) “Measuring Systemic Risk,” working paper.[10]See, for example, the Vox article entitled “Finance and growth: Too much of a good thing?” by Thorsten Beck, 27 October 2013. [11]Philippon, T., (2010), “Financiers versus Engineers: Should the Financial Sector be Taxed or Subsidized?”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(3), 158-182.[12]Philippon, T. and A. Reshef, (2012) “Wages and Human Capital in the U.S. Finance Industry: 1909-2006”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(4), 1551-1609.[13]Philippon, T., (2007) “Un capitalisme d´héritiers: la crise française du travail”, Éditions SeuilReproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen delight today award germán bernácer prize thoma philippon professor financ stern school busi new york univers thoma philippon renown scholar widerang research agenda theoret empir numer prize won throughout career includ best paper award sever top journal speak loud academ qualiti contribut thoma research right intersect macroeconom financ also high policyrelev least central banker perspect tri highlight today fact mani central bank ecb particular devot consider attent activ contribut burgeon literatur macrofin financi crisi underscor need better understand linkag health financi sector perform real economi promot econom research field essenti step process develop effect polici ensur stabil financi sector ultim foster econom growth prime exampl macroprudenti research network mar research european system central bank close collabor expert academia mar network launch develop core conceptu framework model tool provid research support improv macroprudenti supervis eu work formal conclud last june summaris public report repres fine exampl policyrelev research foster constant communic academ ecb also regular organis seminar confer workshop enabl research policymak practition meet discuss latest research find implic polici addit stimul research highest academ standard ecb invit lead scholar visit conduct research ecb exampl via wim duisenberg fellowship offer support young research fund five lamfalussi fellowship everi year thoma philippon contribut repres excel exampl policyrelev research consid two main area research find particular interest design optim intervent effici financi sector paper publish lead articl american econom review thoma coauthor vasiliki skreta studi design optim public intervent debt market intervent aim restor effici level invest product invest forgon firm face unfair high interest rate due advers select topic paper still time sinc asymmetr inform play crucial role collaps financi market autumn thoma philippon paper identifi key issu associ intervent particular analys interact intervent condit firm face market decis firm particip support programm influenc condit difficult rais fund market time firm accept public assist may perceiv bad signal thus limit incent particip problem stigma attach support programm paper spell two clear implic polici first provid robust conceptu support idea choic intervent depend crucial natur friction resembl contract use market particip exampl case freez debt market due advers select optim intervent requir debt instrument direct lend debt guarante second highlight stigma associ intervent relev issu design programm take account ecb deal issu exampl context first two longerterm refinanc oper announc decemb banker rais concern might stigma attach ecb programm said decis accept longterm loan ecb seen ration busi decis sign bank distress import clear identifi natur friction lead market failur design intervent also emphasis anoth contribut thoma philippon paper journal financ written schnabl characteris optim intervent financi industri plagu debt overhang problem bank financ much debt forgo product invest e lend event bankruptci debt holder would appropri cash flow thoma philippon coauthor show case optim intervent consist capit inject prefer stock plus warrant condit suffici bank particip design make possibl restor effici level lend provid capit bank time minimis cost intervent control potenti opportunist behaviour bank particular author highlight two type opportunist behaviour induc intervent first sinc bank direct particip may benefit overal improv market condit free rider problem aris therefor intervent condit particip critic mass bank second condit favour bank may choos strateg particip programm thus increas overal cost henc paramount intervent entail cost current sharehold need stress relev issu becam especi aftermath financi crisi massiv intervent bank industri impos larg cost europ taxpay signific consequ sovereign inde key concern policymak larg support offer financi sector may spur opportunist behaviour general distort financi institut risktak incent possibl magnifi cost intervent reduc effect thoma philippon analysi time tackl relev issu new rule intervent resolut bank current implement new eu rule surround bank resolut found strong chang cultur easi public bailout new cultur privat bailingin clear go direct prevent distort retain possibl direct recapitalis safeguard financi stabil new resolut framework go implement europ help support sustain growth financi sector induc financi institut internalis negat spillov origin failur thoma philippon coauthor among winner germán bernácer prize lass heje pedersen also contribut literatur system risk topic particular polici relev ecb also invest consider research effort paper author argu financi institut contribut system risk might measur propens undercapitalis system whole undercapitalis system expect shortfal also advoc introduct tax proportion bank system expect shortfal cover loss event crisi let turn thoma second research area name deal effici financi sector crisi reviv debat optim size financi industri financegrowth nexus often especi begin recent crisi public opinion blame excess growth financi industri extrem advantag remuner packag sector one argument debat tradit financegrowth paradigm high wage may draw talent away product sector economi sinc financi nonfinanci sector compet scarc suppli human capit thus excess growth financi sector may fulli desir thoma philippon formal analys tradeoff aej macro paper discuss implement correct tax subsidi guarante optim alloc resourc financi product sector thoma philippon paper publish quarter journal econom analys alloc compens human capit financi industri togeth coauthor ariel reshef document pattern wage skill intens financi industri us author show pattern nonmonoton high compens bank abil financi industri attract skill worker perman featur industri paper show chang financi regul import determin pattern tighter regul tend lead outflow resourc financi sector line research point wide rang subject interest thoma philippon alreadi shown book un capitalism d héritier la crise français du travail muster lot empir evid show labour crisi franc stem bad employersemploye relat associ system preserv inherit direct sociolog capac link serious econom research practic social problem yet anoth sign excel achiev thoma bodi work confid thoma philippon continu make extraordinari contribut research area come year extend sincerest congratul win germán bernácer prize wish thank angela maddaloni agnes leonello director general research help prepar speech avail https www ecb europa eueventspdfconfer mars_report pdf philippon v skreta optim intervent market advers select american econom review see exampl heider f m hoerova c holthausen liquid hoard interbank market spread role counterparti risk ecb work paper role asymmetr inform interbank market freez recent financi crisi moreov de larosièr report point lack transpar one caus financi crisi eu commiss see financi time articl draghi attack banker ecb fear februari philippon p schnabl effici recapit journal financ see speech vítor constâncio bank union mean implic futur bank bank union confer navarra univers madrid april see open speech entitl implic bailin rule bank activ stabil benoît cœuré confer financ recoveri crisi role bank profit stabil regul held bocconi univers septemb acharya v l h pedersen philippon m richardson measur system risk work paper see exampl vox articl entitl financ growth much good thing thorsten beck octob philippon financi versus engin financi sector tax subsid american econom journal macroeconom philippon reshef wage human capit u financ industri quarter journal econom philippon un capitalism d héritier la crise français du travail édition seuilreproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en