Mario Draghi: Monetary policy in a prolonged period of low inflation,26-05-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,3292,"<p>***SummaryIn the context of a certain disconnect between economic performance and inflation the monetary policy response has to be carefully considered and precisely designed. We are not resigned to allowing inflation to remain too low for too long. But to understand “what is too low for too long”, we need to answer two questions.First, why is inflation so low? Second, once we have a decomposition of inflation, we can ask: how likely is it that it persists over the medium-term? Falling commodity prices have accounted for around 80% of the decline in euro area inflation since late 2011. But there are two factors specific to the euro area that contribute to low inflation: the rise in the euro exchange rate and the process of relative price adjustments in certain euro area countries.At present, our expectation is that low inflation will be prolonged but gradually return to 2%. Our responsibility is nonetheless to be alert to the risks to this scenario that might emerge and prepared for action if they do. What we need to be particularly watchful for at the moment is the potential for a negative spiral to take hold between between low inflation, falling inflation expectations and credit, in particular in stressed countries. There is a risk that disinflationary expectations take hold. This may then cause households and firms to defer expenditure in a classic deflationary cycle – especially when monetary policy is at the effective lower bound and so cannot steer the nominal rate down to compensate. On aggregate, euro area firms and households do not seem to be particularly exposed to debt deflation dynamics. But this picture masks the heterogeneity within the euro area. Debt service-to-income ratios tend to be higher in stressed countries. Credit weakness appears to be contributing to economic weakness in these countries. Our analysis suggests that credit constraints are putting a brake on the recovery in stressed countries, which adds to the disinflationary pressures. And heterogeneity becomes a factor in assessing low inflation in the euro area. In terms of the monetary policy response, the key issue is timing. We have to be mindful of mismatches between the various trends: the rise in demand for credit; the repair of bank balance sheets; and the development of capital markets as a complement to bank lending. At this point of the cycle, these considerations feature prominently in the discussions of the Governing Council members. There is no debate about our goal, which is to return inflation towards 2% in the medium-term, in line with our mandate.***Ladies and gentlemen,When we first thought about launching this forum in the spring of last year, we saw a clear value in setting aside time to withdraw from the pressure of our daily routines and the immediacy of decisions. The idea was to devote time to in-depth reflection on how to address the fundamental challenges facing central banks. In the event, the opportunity for in-depth reflection has proven as valuable as we expected – but our ability to detach from the pressures of the moment has been less than we thought. We are meeting against the backdrop of a complex economic situation: a slowly consolidating recovery, but one which has been accompanied by a gradual fall in inflation rates. Cyclical developments are also interacting with structural developments, notably the structural deleveraging of the banking system. All this warrants discussion. To some extent, a disconnect between economic performance and inflation is to be expected in the very early stages of the economic upturn. As households and firms resume their spending plans in the aftermath of a long period of restraint, they tend initially to use existing resources more intensively. This raises measured productivity, but causes employment to return more slowly towards its potential, which reduces price pressures. In this context, the monetary policy response has to be carefully considered and precisely designed. We do not want to be too reactive to those parts of the disinflationary process that are expected to self-correct. We neither want to be too forbearing towards those factors that, if left unchecked, can lastingly undermine price stability. We are not resigned to allowing inflation to remain too low for too long. But to understand “what is too low for too long”, we need to answer two questions.First, why is inflation so low? This is essentially a question about the anatomy of inflation, meaning the nature of the shocks that are causing inflation to deviate from its intended level.Second, once we have a decomposition of inflation, we can ask: how likely is it that it persists over the medium-term? This is a question related to the physiology of inflation, meaning how current low inflation influences economic behaviour and impacts the economy, notably through the formation of expectations. Through the filter of these two questions, I would like to use my remarks this morning to discuss the forthcoming decisions facing the Governing Council. Low inflation is not particular to the euro area. Inflation is low across advanced economies, mainly due to the diminishing effect of oil prices on consumer prices. But looking at the anatomy of inflation, there are two factors specific to the euro area that contribute to especially low inflation here. The first is a common factor: the rise in the euro exchange rate and its effect on the price of internationally traded commodities. The second is a local factor: the process of relative price adjustment in certain euro area countries that pulls down aggregate inflation. Let me explain each of these in turn.Common factorsFalling commodity prices explain the lion’s share of the disinflation the euro area has experienced since the end of 2011. Brent crude oil prices were down by around 7% in euro terms in the first quarter of this year, compared with a year earlier. Food prices were sharply down as well. In fact, these two components have together accounted for around 80% of the decline in euro area HICP inflation since late 2011.The bulk of the imported downside pressures on euro area consumer prices are explained by the strengthening of the effective euro exchange rate, in particular vis-à-vis the dollar. In the past year or so, oil prices in US dollars have fluctuated – by historical standards – over a relatively narrow range. And they have exhibited no clear downward or upward trend. This creates a balance of forces that might affect future inflation. On the one hand, lower commodity prices driven by euro appreciation help compensate for the generally weak developments in disposable income in the euro area. Indeed, real disposable income declined at slower pace throughout 2013, and turned slightly positive in the fourth quarter, increasing by 0.6% year-on-year. To the extent that this supports domestic demand in the euro area it will also create upward pressure on inflation.On the other hand, exchange rate appreciation affects external demand and reduces the competitiveness gains of price and cost adjustment in some euro area countries. This has a countervailing effect on real disposable incomes, while also making disinflation more broad-based. Indeed, if we look at prices of non-energy industrial goods, which are mainly tradable, we see a downward trend across all euro area countries.Local factorsTo add to this, aggregate inflation has been dragged down by local factors linked to the sovereign debt crisis and the process of relative price adjustment in stressed countries. Several euro area countries are currently undergoing internal devaluation to regain price competitiveness, both internationally and within the currency union. The crucial adjustments vis-à-vis other euro area countries have to take place irrespective of changes in the external value of the euro. This process began hesitantly in the early years of the crisis, largely due to nominal rigidities in wages and prices. The result was that adjustment took place more through quantities – i.e. unemployment – than through prices. Stressed countries thus experienced a protracted period of declining disposable incomes and long-drawn-out price adjustment. In this context, several have seen domestic core inflation – that is, excluding the energy and food price effects I just described – fall well below the euro area average. For example, the recent overall fall in services price inflation for the euro area is almost entirely accounted for by price declines in these components in stressed countries.Nevertheless, in the last few years relative price adjustment has accelerated in stressed countries. While this may also have initially weighed on disposable incomes, by creating a closer alignment between relative wage and productivity developments, it should increasingly support future incomes through the competitiveness channel. Export growth has been impressive in several stressed countries. And indeed, nominal income growth in stressed countries turned positive in the fourth quarter of 2013. So to sum up: falling energy and food prices, coupled with the effects of relative price adjustment in stressed countries, explain almost fully the disinflation we have seen in the euro area. We also see that disinflation produces counterveiling forces, which may in time cause it to self-correct. To what extent should monetary policy therefore react to these developments? The answer relates to the physiology of inflation: whether or not these factors are likely to persist into the medium-term and therefore enter the horizon of monetary policy. Temporary movements in the exchange rate or relative price adjustments would not normally warrant a monetary policy response. Given the lag in monetary policy transmission, a monetary impulse would hit the economy just when the effect on inflation has faded out and the impulse is no longer necessary. That said, shocks can change: in certain circumstances temporary shocks can morph into persistent shocks via second-round effects. In particular, a prolonged period of low or even negative inflation rates might destabilise inflation expectations. And we know from international experience this change can happen quite quickly, especially if the objective of monetary policy is not clear. Thus, we have to judge carefully how an apparently temporary shock is spreading through the economy and affecting expectations.Moreover, the situation is more complex if there are impairments in monetary policy transmission that extend the lag between our decisions and their impact on prices, as we see in the euro area today. In these circumstances, there is a risk that, if a temporary shock turns more persistent, any monetary policy response might arrive too late to prevent a more serious downward shift in expectations. Thus, more pre-emptive action may be warranted.At present, our expectation is that low inflation will be prolonged but gradually return to close to 2%. Our responsibility is nonetheless to be alert to the risks to this scenario that might emerge and prepared for action if they do. What we need to be particularly watchful for at the moment is, in my view, the potential for a negative spiral to take hold between between low inflation, falling inflation expectations and credit, in particular in stressed countries.Let me explain.Low inflation, expectations and credit Remember that countries undertaking relative price adjustments have to adjust relative to the average rate of euro area inflation. Low inflation therefore lowers the “nominal bar” around which such adjustments across countries have to happen. In these circumstances, stressed countries will likely experience a temporary period of very low or negative inflation rates. This is what we see in the euro area at the moment.But here the common and local sources of disinflation I mentioned earlier interact. The effect of an appreciating exchange rate is to hold down overall euro area inflation. The nominal bar around which adjustment takes place is lower: In particular, we see a rise in inflation in non-stressed countries that is insufficient to raise the euro area average back to 2%. And the downward adjustment in the stressed countries becomes probably harder and certainly longer, especially if nominal rigidities imply that prices and costs cannot adjust quickly. In this situation, there is a risk that disinflationary expectations take hold. This may then cause households and firms to defer expenditure in a classic deflationary cycle – especially when monetary policy is at the effective lower bound and so cannot steer the nominal rate down to compensate. In addition, an unexpected period of low inflation and low nominal income results in a higher actual and expected future real debt burden. Unless compensated for by expectations of higher future income, firms may reduce investment and households consumption. Banks may in turn respond to this situation with stricter credit standards, which reinforces disinflationary pressure and hence worsens debt burdens. This is fertile ground for a pernicious negative spiral, which then also affects expectations.Propagation through the euro areaSo do we see any signs that low inflation might propagate through the euro area in this way?On aggregate, euro area firms and households do not seem to be particularly exposed to debt deflation dynamics. The interest payment burden of euro area firms – the ratio of their gross interest payments to gross operating surplus – has actually fallen from 22% in 2008 to less than 12% at the end of 2013, which suggests that firms are in a stronger position today to withstand a period of low inflation. For euro area households debt service-to-income ratios are similar – around 14% – while the median household holds the equivalent of around two months’ income in liquid assets to cushion nominal income shocks.But importantly, this picture masks the heterogeneity mentioned previously. For firms in some countries the interest payment burden has in fact risen since 2008, in particular for firms based in stressed countries. Debt service-to-income ratios also tend to be higher in stressed countries, implying greater vulnerabilities in these jurisdictions if low inflation persists. Bank lending also presents a mixed picture. Surveys of bank behaviour show a gradually improving aggregate situation. According to the latest Bank Lending Survey credit conditions generally stabilised at the start of this year, and even improved in some stressed countries. The incremental tightening process that banks reported throughout the crisis seems to have come to a halt. That said, credit conditions remain very heterogeneous across countries and sectors. According to the latest ECB survey on credit access by small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), supply constraints remain especially strong for SMEs in stressed countries. The percentage of financially constrained but viable SMEs – i.e. those with positive turnover in the last six months seeking a bank loan – varies from a minimum of 1% in Germany and Austria to a quarter of the total population in Spain and as much as a third in Portugal. Importantly, credit weakness appears to be contributing to economic weakness in stressed countries. To show this, one can undertake a quantitative exercise to compute “normal credit”, similar to the notion of potential output. The difference between the actual volume of credit and normal credit offers a measure of the “credit gap”, analogous to the output gap. Not surprisingly, this exercise reveals that in non-stressed economies the credit gap is either insignificant or making a very small contribution to economic slack. In stressed economies, the same measure contributes to up to a third of economic slack.This analysis suggests that credit constraints are putting a brake on the recovery in stressed countries, which adds to disinflationary pressures. You can also see why the heterogeneity becomes a factor in assessing low inflation in the euro area. What is the right policy response to these developments?Essentially, we are confronting three issues that might warrant a response. First, the common effect of exogenous factors, including the exchange rate, on euro area inflation. Second, the asymmetric effect of endogenous developments, such as tight access to credit for parts and sectors of the euro area. And third, the risk that those effects combine to generate a more persistent regime of excessively low inflation.Let me elaborate on those three issues. First, to the extent that developments in the exchange rate, money or capital markets result in an unwarranted tightening of monetary and financial conditions, this would require adjustment of our conventional instruments, so as to secure the degree of monetary accommodation intended by the Governing Council.At the other end of the spectrum would be a too prolonged downward departure of inflation and/or inflation expectations from our projected baseline scenario, for example due to the interaction between exchange rate developments and medium-term inflation expectations as I explained earlier. This would call for a more expansionary stance, which would be the context for a broad-based asset purchase programme. An intermediate situation is one where credit supply constraints interfere with the transmission of monetary policy and impair the effects of our intended monetary stance. This would require targeted measures to help alleviate credit constraints. I would like to dwell shortly on this contingency because it relates to the important question of whether weak credit growth results from low credit demand or supply constraints. Weak credit demand in the early stages of an economic recovery is not unusual. Credit growth typically lags the recovery by three to four quarters as firms draw down internal funds. But a recovery eventually results in growing credit demand. And at this point, for monetary policy to produce its full effects, there must be no binding constraints on credit supply through the banking system. The more the recovery progresses, the more important it is that supply constraints ease so that the recovery can gather steam. Given where we are in the cycle today, it is highly desirable that banks advance the structural adjustment of their balance sheets, so that they can meet demand for credit as it emerges.It is in part for this reason that we early on placed a great deal of emphasis on a timely comprehensive assessment of bank balance sheets, in the context of the creation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism. Frontloading bank balance sheet adjustment addresses capital constraints on credit supply. Only banks that have fully accounted for legacy losses and hold sufficient equity can take on risk again and therefore originate and price loans in normal conditions. The comprehensive assessment, while still ongoing, has already had a catalytic effect on asset revaluation and provisioning and on capital raising. We expect it also to feed through into new credit as it reaches completion.Meeting credit demand is likewise why we have publicly supported measures to revive high quality securitisation in Europe. This complements the comprehensive assessment by helping remove capital constraints to loan origination. And it supports the development of capital markets, which will be essential to sustain credit supply while the banking system transitions towards a less leveraged, less risky model. The key issue today, however, is timing. We have to be mindful of mismatches between these various trends: the rise in demand for credit; the repair of bank balance sheets; and the development of capital markets as a complement to bank lending. Credit demand may pick up more quickly than the other trends gain traction.If, in this context, availability of term funding is a limiting factor on loan origination, then monetary policy can play a bridging role. Term-funding of loans, be it on-balance sheet – that is, through refinancing operations – or off-balance sheet – that is, through purchases of asset-backed securities – could help reduce any drag on the recovery coming from temporary credit supply constraints.Let me conclude.What I have laid out today is a decomposition of the factors behind low inflation in the euro area, and how they interact, percolate through the real economy and may affect medium-term price stability. At this point of the cycle, all three contingencies I have discussed remain topical and feature prominently in the discussions of the Governing Council members. Certainly, any policy response requires a careful assessment of the costs and benefits of the various tools at hand. But there is no debate about our goal, which is to return inflation towards 2% in the medium-term, in line with our mandate.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",summaryin context certain disconnect econom perform inflat monetari polici respons care consid precis design resign allow inflat remain low long understand low long need answer two question first inflat low second decomposit inflat ask like persist mediumterm fall commod price account around declin euro area inflat sinc late two factor specif euro area contribut low inflat rise euro exchang rate process relat price adjust certain euro area countri present expect low inflat prolong gradual return respons nonetheless alert risk scenario might emerg prepar action need particular watch moment potenti negat spiral take hold low inflat fall inflat expect credit particular stress countri risk disinflationari expect take hold may caus household firm defer expenditur classic deflationari cycl especi monetari polici effect lower bound cannot steer nomin rate compens aggreg euro area firm household seem particular expos debt deflat dynam pictur mask heterogen within euro area debt servicetoincom ratio tend higher stress countri credit weak appear contribut econom weak countri analysi suggest credit constraint put brake recoveri stress countri add disinflationari pressur heterogen becom factor assess low inflat euro area term monetari polici respons key issu time mind mismatch various trend rise demand credit repair bank balanc sheet develop capit market complement bank lend point cycl consider featur promin discuss govern council member debat goal return inflat toward mediumterm line mandat ladi gentlemen first thought launch forum spring last year saw clear valu set asid time withdraw pressur daili routin immediaci decis idea devot time indepth reflect address fundament challeng face central bank event opportun indepth reflect proven valuabl expect abil detach pressur moment less thought meet backdrop complex econom situat slowli consolid recoveri one accompani gradual fall inflat rate cyclic develop also interact structur develop notabl structur deleverag bank system warrant discuss extent disconnect econom perform inflat expect earli stage econom upturn household firm resum spend plan aftermath long period restraint tend initi use exist resourc intens rais measur product caus employ return slowli toward potenti reduc price pressur context monetari polici respons care consid precis design want reactiv part disinflationari process expect selfcorrect neither want forbear toward factor left uncheck last undermin price stabil resign allow inflat remain low long understand low long need answer two question first inflat low essenti question anatomi inflat mean natur shock caus inflat deviat intend level second decomposit inflat ask like persist mediumterm question relat physiolog inflat mean current low inflat influenc econom behaviour impact economi notabl format expect filter two question would like use remark morn discuss forthcom decis face govern council low inflat particular euro area inflat low across advanc economi main due diminish effect oil price consum price look anatomi inflat two factor specif euro area contribut especi low inflat first common factor rise euro exchang rate effect price intern trade commod second local factor process relat price adjust certain euro area countri pull aggreg inflat let explain turn common factorsfal commod price explain lion share disinfl euro area experienc sinc end brent crude oil price around euro term first quarter year compar year earlier food price sharpli well fact two compon togeth account around declin euro area hicp inflat sinc late bulk import downsid pressur euro area consum price explain strengthen effect euro exchang rate particular visàvi dollar past year oil price us dollar fluctuat histor standard relat narrow rang exhibit clear downward upward trend creat balanc forc might affect futur inflat one hand lower commod price driven euro appreci help compens general weak develop dispos incom euro area inde real dispos incom declin slower pace throughout turn slight posit fourth quarter increas yearonyear extent support domest demand euro area also creat upward pressur inflat hand exchang rate appreci affect extern demand reduc competit gain price cost adjust euro area countri countervail effect real dispos incom also make disinfl broadbas inde look price nonenergi industri good main tradabl see downward trend across euro area countri local factorsto add aggreg inflat drag local factor link sovereign debt crisi process relat price adjust stress countri sever euro area countri current undergo intern devalu regain price competit intern within currenc union crucial adjust visàvi euro area countri take place irrespect chang extern valu euro process began hesit earli year crisi larg due nomin rigid wage price result adjust took place quantiti e unemploy price stress countri thus experienc protract period declin dispos incom longdrawnout price adjust context sever seen domest core inflat exclud energi food price effect describ fall well euro area averag exampl recent overal fall servic price inflat euro area almost entir account price declin compon stress countri nevertheless last year relat price adjust acceler stress countri may also initi weigh dispos incom creat closer align relat wage product develop increas support futur incom competit channel export growth impress sever stress countri inde nomin incom growth stress countri turn posit fourth quarter sum fall energi food price coupl effect relat price adjust stress countri explain almost fulli disinfl seen euro area also see disinfl produc counterveil forc may time caus selfcorrect extent monetari polici therefor react develop answer relat physiolog inflat whether factor like persist mediumterm therefor enter horizon monetari polici temporari movement exchang rate relat price adjust would normal warrant monetari polici respons given lag monetari polici transmiss monetari impuls would hit economi effect inflat fade impuls longer necessari said shock chang certain circumst temporari shock morph persist shock via secondround effect particular prolong period low even negat inflat rate might destabilis inflat expect know intern experi chang happen quit quick especi object monetari polici clear thus judg care appar temporari shock spread economi affect expect moreov situat complex impair monetari polici transmiss extend lag decis impact price see euro area today circumst risk temporari shock turn persist monetari polici respons might arriv late prevent serious downward shift expect thus preemptiv action may warrant present expect low inflat prolong gradual return close respons nonetheless alert risk scenario might emerg prepar action need particular watch moment view potenti negat spiral take hold low inflat fall inflat expect credit particular stress countri let explain low inflat expect credit rememb countri undertak relat price adjust adjust relat averag rate euro area inflat low inflat therefor lower nomin bar around adjust across countri happen circumst stress countri like experi temporari period low negat inflat rate see euro area moment common local sourc disinfl mention earlier interact effect appreci exchang rate hold overal euro area inflat nomin bar around adjust take place lower particular see rise inflat nonstress countri insuffici rais euro area averag back downward adjust stress countri becom probabl harder certain longer especi nomin rigid impli price cost cannot adjust quick situat risk disinflationari expect take hold may caus household firm defer expenditur classic deflationari cycl especi monetari polici effect lower bound cannot steer nomin rate compens addit unexpect period low inflat low nomin incom result higher actual expect futur real debt burden unless compens expect higher futur incom firm may reduc invest household consumpt bank may turn respond situat stricter credit standard reinforc disinflationari pressur henc worsen debt burden fertil ground pernici negat spiral also affect expect propag euro areaso see sign low inflat might propag euro area way aggreg euro area firm household seem particular expos debt deflat dynam interest payment burden euro area firm ratio gross interest payment gross oper surplus actual fallen less end suggest firm stronger posit today withstand period low inflat euro area household debt servicetoincom ratio similar around median household hold equival around two month incom liquid asset cushion nomin incom shock import pictur mask heterogen mention previous firm countri interest payment burden fact risen sinc particular firm base stress countri debt servicetoincom ratio also tend higher stress countri impli greater vulner jurisdict low inflat persist bank lend also present mix pictur survey bank behaviour show gradual improv aggreg situat accord latest bank lend survey credit condit general stabilis start year even improv stress countri increment tighten process bank report throughout crisi seem come halt said credit condit remain heterogen across countri sector accord latest ecb survey credit access small mediums enterpris smes suppli constraint remain especi strong smes stress countri percentag financi constrain viabl smes e posit turnov last six month seek bank loan vari minimum germani austria quarter total popul spain much third portug import credit weak appear contribut econom weak stress countri show one undertak quantit exercis comput normal credit similar notion potenti output differ actual volum credit normal credit offer measur credit gap analog output gap surpris exercis reveal nonstress economi credit gap either insignific make small contribut econom slack stress economi measur contribut third econom slack analysi suggest credit constraint put brake recoveri stress countri add disinflationari pressur also see heterogen becom factor assess low inflat euro area right polici respons develop essenti confront three issu might warrant respons first common effect exogen factor includ exchang rate euro area inflat second asymmetr effect endogen develop tight access credit part sector euro area third risk effect combin generat persist regim excess low inflat let elabor three issu first extent develop exchang rate money capit market result unwarr tighten monetari financi condit would requir adjust convent instrument secur degre monetari accommod intend govern council end spectrum would prolong downward departur inflat andor inflat expect project baselin scenario exampl due interact exchang rate develop mediumterm inflat expect explain earlier would call expansionari stanc would context broadbas asset purchas programm intermedi situat one credit suppli constraint interfer transmiss monetari polici impair effect intend monetari stanc would requir target measur help allevi credit constraint would like dwell short conting relat import question whether weak credit growth result low credit demand suppli constraint weak credit demand earli stage econom recoveri unusu credit growth typic lag recoveri three four quarter firm draw intern fund recoveri eventu result grow credit demand point monetari polici produc full effect must bind constraint credit suppli bank system recoveri progress import suppli constraint eas recoveri gather steam given cycl today high desir bank advanc structur adjust balanc sheet meet demand credit emerg part reason earli place great deal emphasi time comprehens assess bank balanc sheet context creation singl supervisori mechan frontload bank balanc sheet adjust address capit constraint credit suppli bank fulli account legaci loss hold suffici equiti take risk therefor origin price loan normal condit comprehens assess still ongo alreadi catalyt effect asset revalu provis capit rais expect also feed new credit reach complet meet credit demand likewis public support measur reviv high qualiti securitis europ complement comprehens assess help remov capit constraint loan origin support develop capit market essenti sustain credit suppli bank system transit toward less leverag less riski model key issu today howev time mind mismatch various trend rise demand credit repair bank balanc sheet develop capit market complement bank lend credit demand may pick quick trend gain traction context avail term fund limit factor loan origin monetari polici play bridg role termfund loan onbal sheet refinanc oper offbal sheet purchas assetback secur could help reduc drag recoveri come temporari credit suppli constraint let conclud laid today decomposit factor behind low inflat euro area interact percol real economi may affect mediumterm price stabil point cycl three conting discuss remain topic featur promin discuss govern council member certain polici respons requir care assess cost benefit various tool hand debat goal return inflat toward mediumterm line mandat reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en