Benoît Cœuré: Where to exit to? Monetary policy implementation after the crisis,03-05-2013,European Central Bank,ECB,3205,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen, [1]It is a great pleasure to attend once again the Geneva Conference and discuss the important issue of exit from non-conventional monetary policies. Let me start with an important word of caution. We are still struggling with the euro area crisis. Yesterday’s decisions by the Governing Council of the ECB on reduction of the key interest rates, on modalities of liquidity provision and on possible ways forward to enhance the availability of credit to the broad economy should support prospects for a recovery later this year. But current underlying economic conditions still imply that the monetary policy stance will remain accommodative for as long as needed. That said, exit from non-conventional policies will come one day, and lessons drawn from the crisis times will help us chart out our path. The debate on exit has chiefly concentrated on strategies: that is, on monetary policy reaction functions on the way out of these policies and over the new steady state. But it is fair to say that – with only few exceptions – participants in the debate have been less active in discussing the operating framework of monetary policy. Here, a few interesting questions remain unanswered. Will central banks go back to their pre-crisis operating framework once conditions return to normal? Or should some of the novel instruments remain in their toolbox ready for use, or even as standing instruments replacing old practices?Let me start by mentioning the three main developments that, in my view, took place during the crisis:  First, central banks collectively moved towards instruments that can effectively disentangle interest rate decisions from decisions concerning the size of their balance sheets. One can debate whether this constitutes genuine bifurcation of instruments. And, with Tinbergen in mind, one could also conjecture that, in this way, the traditional assignment of the interest rate instrument to the price stability objective could be reinforced by an independent lever which, through its control over the volumes of central bank credit, would independently promote stable financial conditions. Here, other central banks had to innovate more than the ECB. The Fed, for example, acquired the authority to pay interest on reserves and this placed a floor – or, more precisely, a lower grey zone of values – on the level which the Fed funds rate can take on in daily overnight trading. The ECB, by contrast, entered the crisis with a corridor system and an elastic operating framework which did not need much tweaking to offset shocks. But we did shift from a competitive auction system, in which quantities are controlled by the central bank, to one in which we fix the price and take the quantities as endogenous in liquidity-providing operations. And this meant at some point that the overnight rate was left to drift down to the floor of the corridor, where it still stands. This, in turn, implies that the overnight rate has become more independent of the volume of excess liquidity.  Second important development during the crisis: central banks in a large part of the world engaged in non-conventional measures aimed at absorbing liquidity risk and duration risk from the market. Those central banks engaged in quantitative easing have focused on duration risk and have targeted term premia. The ECB has primarily concentrated on liquidity risk. As I said, we decided to fully accommodate banks’ demand for liquidity in an elastic manner. We also expanded the list of eligible collateral, so that banks could more easily liquefy their balance sheets and mobilise assets that had become scarcely tradable for liquidity purposes with us. The ECB took care of duration risk (or in our case funding risk), indirectly, to the extent that we replaced banks’ intermediate-maturity wholesale market borrowing with our longer- term refinancing operations. As a result, the duration risk vis-à-vis banks that markets did not want to bear migrated, to a certain extent and temporarily, to our balance sheet. Finally, the third important development during the crisis was that central banks had to substitute for the sudden disruption of interbank market activity and became de facto the “money market intermediary” of last – and sometimes first - resort. For the ECB this was facilitated by the broad range of counterparties accepted in monetary policy operations and its broad collateral framework. Other central banks had to innovate in order to step up their intermediation role by resorting to specific targeted facilities outside their standard operating environment. Modalities and parameters of intervention were adapted to local circumstances, such as the depth and liquidity of financial markets and the degree of intermediation in the financing of the economy, which differ considerably across major economies. Some would argue that it is likely that most of the new instruments may not be needed to the same extent once money market conditions - and more generally the transmission channels of monetary policy- return to normal. But is it so likely? This immediately brings up the question that the panel is posing: “Where to exit to?”. We may want to ask ourselves which elements of our current mode of operation have served us well, and not only as a crisis management tool, and may therefore survive as a more permanent feature of the new steady state. So, let me share some thoughts on what remains unresolved about the issues that I mentioned at the start. I see four open questions, and I want to be very honest: I will not give answers. First question: the size and degree of symmetry of the interest rate corridor. Second question: the duration and maturity of central bank operations. Third question: the mode of the liquidity provision to banks. And fourth, the shifts in amplitude and quality of collateral pools, and the risk management implications associated with these shifts. Let me start by discussing the interest rate corridor. As I mentioned already, the ECB entered the crisis with a tradition of conducting policy through a corridor – others would say, a “channel” – system. The ECB’s corridor is determined by the two overnight standing facilities: the marginal lending facility and the deposit facility. These standing facilities were set symmetrically around the main policy rate charged on central bank credit at the weekly refinancing operations. Prior to the crisis, the quantity provision at our weekly operations was calibrated in such a way that, given banks’ liquidity needs, the overnight money market rate would settle close to the policy rate. So, the corridor was symmetric de jure and de facto: liquidity volumes were just sufficient to validate the mid-point of the corridor as the price of liquidity to which market overnight rates would gravitate on average. At the onset of the crisis, we moved quickly from a system of liquidity provision geared towards filling the system’s liquidity deficit towards a set-up in which banks operate under aggregate excess liquidity. So, following the shift to a fixed-rate full allotment mode of liquidity provision in October 2008, overnight money market activity rapidly occupied the lower half of the corridor, and in fact, with few interruptions, the overnight rate has been close to the floor of it ever since. For all practical purposes, the relevant portion of the corridor for daily market activity has shrunk to the space existing between the rate on the main refinancing operations – on the upside – and the rate on the deposit facility – on the downside. Should the corridor be brought back to its standard width – spanning the entire distance between the marginal lending rate and the deposit facility rate – not only de jure but also de facto? In other words: should we go back to the standard quantity-based technology of liquidity provision which was founded on the principle of balanced liquidity conditions? Or should we maintain excess liquidity and operate the system through parallel adjustments to the deposit facility rate and the rate on the main refinancing operations? I am asking this question, because observers – Marvin Goodfriend [2], for example – have been arguing for a system where the monetary authorities adjust a policy floor – the rate paid on reserves or the deposit facility rate – and the system is saturated with excess liquidity, so that overnight market rates are kept close to the floor. Let me expound the merits and drawbacks of the discussed system, again upon the premise that I do not have a quantitative scale to weigh the ones against the others. First advantage: the volatility of the overnight rate would likely be squeezed to minuscule numbers. True, our overnight rate has been more – rather than less – volatile since it moved to the floor of the corridor. But it is also true that excess liquidity conditions have been unsteady and uncertain in the past. Here, I imagine a scenario in which the liquidity supply would be kept steady and reasonably predictable. A more stable overnight rate, it has been argued, could enhance the transmission of policy shifts – adjustments to the deposit facility rate – throughout the term structure of money market rates.Second advantage: the central bank would maintain one important acquisition from the crisis period: that is, its capacity to disentangle interest rate decisions from decisions concerning the scale of its own liquidity operations in order to remain resilient to large-scale liquidity shocks. This possibility may come in handy at the time of exit, in situations when inflation risks would call for a tightening of policy, while concerns about the fragility of the banking system would suggest prolonging the horizon for easy access to central bank credit. But even in the steady state – after the exit – the new system would be marginally more resilient to large liquidity shocks and acute liquidity stress in the money market. Banks would receive funding certainty, as their liquidity needs would be met. But there are drawbacks as well. First, for the ECB at least, this would require banks to be willing to hold reserves in excess of their needs. In a normal situation, absent any financial stress, this is difficult to ensure in a system (like ours) in which liquidity injections are the consequence of counterparties’ – not the central bank’s – decisions. Second, importantly, a system of permanent excess liquidity could potentially distort signals of liquidity and credit risk in the money market, as money market activity could be compressed – or suppressed altogether. I will come back to this point in a short while. Let me turn to the second issue, the duration and maturity of central bank operations. In our case, before the crisis, the bulk of liquidity was provided through operations with a maturity of one week. We also provided (pre-set) amounts through longer-term operations, but to a lesser extent and with a maximum maturity of three months. As an alternative, one may conceive of frameworks in which the menu of maturities open for bank borrowing would be much richer. For example, there could be merits in matching the more structural long-term trends in the autonomous liquidity factors, most notably the growth in currency in circulation, with corresponding instruments of structural liquidity supply at longer maturities. Expanding the range of maturities following the exit would probably go hand-in-hand with the decision to return to competitive auctions. But such a steady state framework would be nevertheless more robust to renewed bouts of perceived funding risk in the market. Let me turn to the third – very much related – issue: the most appropriate mode of liquidity provision and the desirability of market versus central bank intermediation. Before the crisis, the intermediation role of the ECB was limited to filling the structural “liquidity deficit” of all the banks vis-à-vis the monetary authority. The pre-crisis weekly liquidity provision through variable rate competitive auctions was thought to be best suited to reveal banks’ “true” liquidity demand, incentivise interbank transactions, and enhance market scrutiny of banks’ credit standing, beyond the quality of the collateral that they could pledge in our lending operations.But, during the crisis, we have moved to a system in which the central bank is de facto the “market intermediary” of last – and sometimes – first resort. This has further weakened banks’ incentives to trade liquidity in the market. Do we need them to trade in the very short-term market in the first place? Well, this is a fundamental issue for optimal mechanism design. It is not entirely clear whether an interbank market is strictly needed from a welfare perspective. The key function of markets is price discovery. But here the price to be discovered is not only the starting point of parties’ negotiations, but also the end-point of the market tâtonnement: it is the price pre-set by the central bank! So, some would argue: why do we need a market if the price is pre-determined? Of course, I am over-simplifying. The welfare function of the secured money market probably differs and is less important than that of the unsecured money market, where the market exercises a type of discipline that a central bank backstop would not be able to provide. Let's not forget moral hazard considerations. In stressed systemic conditions, banks may well be deprived of access to interbank credit for reasons that have little to do with their own merit of credit. These are conditions that require central bank interventions to replace the market, when this fails. But in normal times, banks which are kept out may be those that deserve credit restrictions. In this case, a central bank taking away market pressure would distort the market, not repair a market imperfection.Also, allowing the price to be determined by competitive forces may have the collateral merit of revealing market information which is certainly of great value to the central bank. Maintaining an active market for liquidity may be an important pre-condition for the central bank to monitor important variables, such as the evolving market standing of single institutions and the dynamic process by which banks evaluate and price liquidity risk. Finally, let me briefly address the fourth and last issue: the collateral framework. The crisis has underscored the importance of the collateral framework for monetary policy implementation. I believe there is still much to learn in this area. Ideally, any decision on the collateral framework under a new steady state should be based on a thorough examination of the impact of collateral valuation and haircuts on the size and composition of banks’ balance sheets, and the ramifications for the stability of the financial sector as a whole. Such an examination cannot be conducted in isolation from a review of collateral rules followed in private transactions, which could be affected by the on-going regulatory overhaul, in particular the migration of over-the-counter derivatives to clearing houses. The ECB’s operational framework, conducting monetary policy operations as temporary refinancing operations in a corridor system, has not only served us well. It has also provided us with enormous flexibility during the crisis. By adjusting the price, amount, maturity, allotment procedures and eligible collateral for our operations we have been effective in containing funding risks of banks and in addressing distress in the money market. In a sense, the system can well be rolled back to the previous steady state, with the comforting expectation that this flexibility is a built-in permanent mechanism that restores itself again, elastically, in case of need. Yet, some of the questions I posed may be worth reflecting upon. And I am grateful to the organisers of this conference for stimulating discussion of these issues. Before turning the floor to the other panellists, let me briefly add some further points on the interactions between exiting non-conventional monetary policy and financial stability. Exiting the crisis mode could pose risks to financial stability in the current environment, which is marked by a prolonged period of low yields and reduced volatility, making it challenging for the financial sector to properly accommodate interest rate risk. The exit could be associated with a steepening of the yield curve as expectations of low short-term rates are reversed and central banks reduce their holdings of long-term securities. Uncertainty on the path of exit from unconventional policies may trigger a rise in volatility at the long end of the yield curve, exposing banks and investors to substantial losses. These effects would be more pronounced if the speed of interest rate adjustment were to exceed market expectations. At the same time, delaying the exit from “crisis” monetary policies beyond what central banks’ reaction function would warrant could also entail risks to financial stability, by inducing a further build-up of the very same exposures that render exit more challenging in the current environment. In particular, a protracted period of low interest rates and ample liquidity could compromise the market mechanisms in efficiently allocating resources, hence encouraging the roll-over of loans to non-profitable businesses and weakening incentives for balance sheet repair. Prolonging low interest rates for a long time might raise the possibility of sudden shifts in market expectations and significant re-pricing of risks once indications of monetary policy tightening materialise. Of course, these risks should also not be overrated at a time when financial risks are currently highly correlated with overall macroeconomic risks. Exit is very likely to take place in an environment where credit has recovered and risks have receded in the economy, making the financial sector more robust to interest rate shocks. The current situation of subdued bank lending and outlook for growth in the euro area is a case in point. Yet, monetary policy-makers have to be aware of these challenges and need to guard against the risk of financial dominance by keeping a clear focus on their respective mandate. For the ECB, our “hardwired” focus on price stability provides a clear guidepost that has proved effective in anchoring inflation expectations over time. And the prominent role given to money and credit developments in our strategy ensures a more symmetric reaction to financial forces over the cycle. At the same time, it is important that central banks continue to place particular emphasis on managing expectations. The ECB has all the instruments at hand to ensure a smooth exit if risks to medium term price stability should materialise. Our credit operations are temporary and the market has all the information to date to anticipate their unwinding and make adequate adjustments to prepare. If liquidity conditions should prove too lax while central bank credit is still abundant, we have available instruments of liquidity re-absorption to tighten money market. Some of these instruments have been tested successfully in the course of the crisis. Finally, let me stress that a sound financial system is a necessary condition for an orderly exit, hence the importance of a swift implementation of the banking union in the euro area. This should include not only the Single Supervisory Mechanism but also a Single Resolution Mechanism, with a single resolution fund based on contributions by the industry and a common, last-resort fiscal backstop. This also includes the assessment of banks’ balance sheets that will be undertaken in the transition to the Single Supervisory Mechanism. I thank you for your attention.[1]I wish to thank Massimo Rostagno, Tobias Linzert and Arthur Saint-Guilhem for their contributions to these remarks. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contains herein.[2]Marvin Goodfriend, “Interest on Reserves and Monetary Policy”, FRBNY Economic Policy Review, May 2002.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur attend geneva confer discuss import issu exit nonconvent monetari polici let start import word caution still struggl euro area crisi yesterday decis govern council ecb reduct key interest rate modal liquid provis possibl way forward enhanc avail credit broad economi support prospect recoveri later year current under econom condit still impli monetari polici stanc remain accommod long need said exit nonconvent polici come one day lesson drawn crisi time help us chart path debat exit chiefli concentr strategi monetari polici reaction function way polici new steadi state fair say except particip debat less activ discuss oper framework monetari polici interest question remain unansw central bank go back precrisi oper framework condit return normal novel instrument remain toolbox readi use even stand instrument replac old practic let start mention three main develop view took place crisi first central bank collect move toward instrument effect disentangl interest rate decis decis concern size balanc sheet one debat whether constitut genuin bifurc instrument tinbergen mind one could also conjectur way tradit assign interest rate instrument price stabil object could reinforc independ lever control volum central bank credit would independ promot stabl financi condit central bank innov ecb fed exampl acquir author pay interest reserv place floor precis lower grey zone valu level fed fund rate take daili overnight trade ecb contrast enter crisi corridor system elast oper framework need much tweak offset shock shift competit auction system quantiti control central bank one fix price take quantiti endogen liquidityprovid oper meant point overnight rate left drift floor corridor still stand turn impli overnight rate becom independ volum excess liquid second import develop crisi central bank larg part world engag nonconvent measur aim absorb liquid risk durat risk market central bank engag quantit eas focus durat risk target term premia ecb primarili concentr liquid risk said decid fulli accommod bank demand liquid elast manner also expand list elig collater bank could easili liquefi balanc sheet mobilis asset becom scarc tradabl liquid purpos us ecb took care durat risk case fund risk indirect extent replac bank intermediatematur wholesal market borrow longer term refinanc oper result durat risk visàvi bank market want bear migrat certain extent temporarili balanc sheet final third import develop crisi central bank substitut sudden disrupt interbank market activ becam de facto money market intermediari last sometim first resort ecb facilit broad rang counterparti accept monetari polici oper broad collater framework central bank innov order step intermedi role resort specif target facil outsid standard oper environ modal paramet intervent adapt local circumst depth liquid financi market degre intermedi financ economi differ consider across major economi would argu like new instrument may need extent money market condit general transmiss channel monetari polici return normal like immedi bring question panel pose exit may want ask element current mode oper serv us well crisi manag tool may therefor surviv perman featur new steadi state let share thought remain unresolv issu mention start see four open question want honest give answer first question size degre symmetri interest rate corridor second question durat matur central bank oper third question mode liquid provis bank fourth shift amplitud qualiti collater pool risk manag implic associ shift let start discuss interest rate corridor mention alreadi ecb enter crisi tradit conduct polici corridor other would say channel system ecb corridor determin two overnight stand facil margin lend facil deposit facil stand facil set symmetr around main polici rate charg central bank credit week refinanc oper prior crisi quantiti provis week oper calibr way given bank liquid need overnight money market rate would settl close polici rate corridor symmetr de jure de facto liquid volum suffici valid midpoint corridor price liquid market overnight rate would gravit averag onset crisi move quick system liquid provis gear toward fill system liquid deficit toward setup bank oper aggreg excess liquid follow shift fixedr full allot mode liquid provis octob overnight money market activ rapid occupi lower half corridor fact interrupt overnight rate close floor ever sinc practic purpos relev portion corridor daili market activ shrunk space exist rate main refinanc oper upsid rate deposit facil downsid corridor brought back standard width span entir distanc margin lend rate deposit facil rate de jure also de facto word go back standard quantitybas technolog liquid provis found principl balanc liquid condit maintain excess liquid oper system parallel adjust deposit facil rate rate main refinanc oper ask question observ marvin goodfriend exampl argu system monetari author adjust polici floor rate paid reserv deposit facil rate system satur excess liquid overnight market rate kept close floor let expound merit drawback discuss system upon premis quantit scale weigh one other first advantag volatil overnight rate would like squeez minuscul number true overnight rate rather less volatil sinc move floor corridor also true excess liquid condit unsteadi uncertain past imagin scenario liquid suppli would kept steadi reason predict stabl overnight rate argu could enhanc transmiss polici shift adjust deposit facil rate throughout term structur money market rate second advantag central bank would maintain one import acquisit crisi period capac disentangl interest rate decis decis concern scale liquid oper order remain resili largescal liquid shock possibl may come handi time exit situat inflat risk would call tighten polici concern fragil bank system would suggest prolong horizon easi access central bank credit even steadi state exit new system would margin resili larg liquid shock acut liquid stress money market bank would receiv fund certainti liquid need would met drawback well first ecb least would requir bank will hold reserv excess need normal situat absent financi stress difficult ensur system like liquid inject consequ counterparti central bank decis second import system perman excess liquid could potenti distort signal liquid credit risk money market money market activ could compress suppress altogeth come back point short let turn second issu durat matur central bank oper case crisi bulk liquid provid oper matur one week also provid preset amount longerterm oper lesser extent maximum matur three month altern one may conceiv framework menu matur open bank borrow would much richer exampl could merit match structur longterm trend autonom liquid factor notabl growth currenc circul correspond instrument structur liquid suppli longer matur expand rang matur follow exit would probabl go handinhand decis return competit auction steadi state framework would nevertheless robust renew bout perceiv fund risk market let turn third much relat issu appropri mode liquid provis desir market versus central bank intermedi crisi intermedi role ecb limit fill structur liquid deficit bank visàvi monetari author precrisi week liquid provis variabl rate competit auction thought best suit reveal bank true liquid demand incentivis interbank transact enhanc market scrutini bank credit stand beyond qualiti collater could pledg lend oper crisi move system central bank de facto market intermediari last sometim first resort weaken bank incent trade liquid market need trade shortterm market first place well fundament issu optim mechan design entir clear whether interbank market strict need welfar perspect key function market price discoveri price discov start point parti negoti also endpoint market tâtonnement price preset central bank would argu need market price predetermin cours oversimplifi welfar function secur money market probabl differ less import unsecur money market market exercis type disciplin central bank backstop would abl provid let forget moral hazard consider stress system condit bank may well depriv access interbank credit reason littl merit credit condit requir central bank intervent replac market fail normal time bank kept may deserv credit restrict case central bank take away market pressur would distort market repair market imperfect also allow price determin competit forc may collater merit reveal market inform certain great valu central bank maintain activ market liquid may import precondit central bank monitor import variabl evolv market stand singl institut dynam process bank evalu price liquid risk final let briefli address fourth last issu collater framework crisi underscor import collater framework monetari polici implement believ still much learn area ideal decis collater framework new steadi state base thorough examin impact collater valuat haircut size composit bank balanc sheet ramif stabil financi sector whole examin cannot conduct isol review collater rule follow privat transact could affect ongo regulatori overhaul particular migrat overthecount deriv clear hous ecb oper framework conduct monetari polici oper temporari refinanc oper corridor system serv us well also provid us enorm flexibl crisi adjust price amount matur allot procedur elig collater oper effect contain fund risk bank address distress money market sens system well roll back previous steadi state comfort expect flexibl builtin perman mechan restor elast case need yet question pose may worth reflect upon grate organis confer stimul discuss issu turn floor panellist let briefli add point interact exit nonconvent monetari polici financi stabil exit crisi mode could pose risk financi stabil current environ mark prolong period low yield reduc volatil make challeng financi sector proper accommod interest rate risk exit could associ steepen yield curv expect low shortterm rate revers central bank reduc hold longterm secur uncertainti path exit unconvent polici may trigger rise volatil long end yield curv expos bank investor substanti loss effect would pronounc speed interest rate adjust exceed market expect time delay exit crisi monetari polici beyond central bank reaction function would warrant could also entail risk financi stabil induc buildup exposur render exit challeng current environ particular protract period low interest rate ampl liquid could compromis market mechan effici alloc resourc henc encourag rollov loan nonprofit busi weaken incent balanc sheet repair prolong low interest rate long time might rais possibl sudden shift market expect signific repric risk indic monetari polici tighten materialis cours risk also overr time financi risk current high correl overal macroeconom risk exit like take place environ credit recov risk reced economi make financi sector robust interest rate shock current situat subdu bank lend outlook growth euro area case point yet monetari policymak awar challeng need guard risk financi domin keep clear focus respect mandat ecb hardwir focus price stabil provid clear guidepost prove effect anchor inflat expect time promin role given money credit develop strategi ensur symmetr reaction financi forc cycl time import central bank continu place particular emphasi manag expect ecb instrument hand ensur smooth exit risk medium term price stabil materialis credit oper temporari market inform date anticip unwind make adequ adjust prepar liquid condit prove lax central bank credit still abund avail instrument liquid reabsorpt tighten money market instrument test success cours crisi final let stress sound financi system necessari condit order exit henc import swift implement bank union euro area includ singl supervisori mechan also singl resolut mechan singl resolut fund base contribut industri common lastresort fiscal backstop also includ assess bank balanc sheet undertaken transit singl supervisori mechan thank attent wish thank massimo rostagno tobia linzert arthur saintguilhem contribut remark remain sole respons opinion contain herein marvin goodfriend interest reserv monetari polici frbni econom polici review may reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en