Jürgen Stark: Keynote address at the EUROMONEY conference,28-04-2010,European Central Bank,ECB,2423,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,In autumn 2008, the world economy entered the worst financial crisis and the deepest recession since the Great Depression. Both monetary and fiscal policies responded vigorously to this exceptional situation and thereby supported the recent recovery. But the crisis is not over yet. The challenges of overcoming it and forestalling a repetition still need to be fully met. Many questions remain open. How much progress has been made in improving the stability of the financial sector? Given the dramatic rise in public debt, especially in advanced economies, will a sovereign debt crisis follow the crisis we have experienced in the financial sector? Is the current multi-speed recovery of economic growth at the global level sustainable?Let me start with the banking sector. Bank profitability has improved, but remains subdued. Further credit-related write-downs are expected throughout this year. Banks have lowered their leverage ratios significantly by reducing risk-weighted assets and being more discriminating vis-à-vis riskier borrowers. Some pressure to continue de-leveraging persists owing to the increased loan portfolio risk and higher target capital ratios. But these developments have not, according to our analysis, led to credit constraints in the economy at large. Rather, the sharp decline in credit growth is a reflection of the even steeper decline in economic growth experienced over past quarters.Let me turn to economic developments. At the global level, economic activity is expected to grow by around 4% this year, while global trade is expected to increase by almost 6% (according to the IMF’s April WEO). Strong growth in emerging market economies in Asia is a major driving force behind these figures. At the same time, advanced economies may be faced with the prospect of a protracted period of sluggish growth, given that the financial crisis is likely to have adversely affected their growth potential. According to a recent OECD study, financial crises in OECD countries are estimated to lower potential output by 1.5 to 2.4 percent on average, while the magnitude of this effect might be significantly larger in the case of a severe crisis. If history is any guide, we should also take note of IMF studies which have found that, in advanced economies, recessions associated with financial crises tend to be unusually severe and long-lasting, with output taking, on average, three years to recover to its pre-crisis peak.In the euro area, recent information indicates that the recovery has continued to expand in the first few months of this year. Looking forward, euro area growth is expected to remain moderate, owing to ongoing balance sheet adjustments in the private sector, weak prospects for the labour market and low capacity utilisation. Available growth forecasts for 2010 put it at, on average, around 1%. The crisis is also expected to have lasting effects on our economy, as both the level and the growth rate of potential output will most likely be reduced for a long time.Divergences in the strength of the recovery, both within and across regions, are expected to persist in 2010. The recovery in the United States is expected to be stronger than in some other advanced economies.The question of the sustainability of the recovery, however, remains open, given high unemployment, continued high levels of household debt, low savings and ongoing tight credit conditions in some of the advanced economies. However, over the medium term I expect per capita GDP growth in the euro area to be similar to that in the United States, as was the case over the period 1999-2009. The difference between the average annual GDP growth rate between the United States (+2.1%) and the euro area (+1.5%) was mainly due to differences in population growth (at 1.0% in the United States and 0.5% in the euro area).Turning to price developments in the euro area, the annual increase in the HICP (Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices) increased to 1.4% in March, up from 0.9% in February, driven predominantly by rising commodity prices globally. The increases in commodity prices have been supported by dynamic growth in emerging market economies. This notwithstanding, inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in line with our aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. We expect inflation in the euro area to remain moderate over the policy-relevant horizon. The outcome of our monetary analysis confirms the assessment of low inflationary pressures over the medium term, with money and credit growth remaining weak. We will therefore follow very carefully all developments over the period ahead, in particular price developments in commodity markets and in the emerging market economies, and their impact on global inflation trends. We also need to monitor very closely the possible adverse impact of fiscal developments on the inflation outlook.Although the response of policy-makers to the crisis has certainly helped to avert an even more dramatic collapse in economic activity in the euro area and elsewhere, challenges abound. I am particularly concerned about the dramatic deterioration in public finances. Most governments in the advanced countries will exit the recession with the highest deficit and debt-to-GDP ratios recorded in times of peace. In the euro area, according to the latest projections by the European Commission, the general government deficit is expected to exceed 6.0% of GDP in 2009, 2010 and 2011. In Japan, the government deficit-to-GDP ratio is foreseen to reach around 9.0% of GDP in these years, whereas the UK and US government deficits are expected to be in excess of 10.0% of GDP in the period 2009-11. These high government deficits are reflected in mounting government debt, which will reach 88% of GDP in 2011 in both the euro area and the United Kingdom, 100% of GDP in the United States and 200% of GDP in Japan. These developments are the consequence of sizeable fiscal stimulus measures and of interventions in support of financial institutions in many advanced countries. But they also bear testimony to the sharp contraction in economic activity. In the euro area, fiscal developments have become a major concern. The situation is particularly acute in countries that failed to consolidate their public finances during buoyant economic times. But this problem is not specific to euro area countries: other countries outside the euro area have also adopted a less prudent approach to the management of their public finances. The current trend in fiscal policies is simply not sustainable. Without a very ambitious fiscal adjustment effort, the debt ratio is projected to continue rising in the next decades. With an annual structural deficit reduction of only 0.5% of GDP, it will take the euro area 20 years or more to return to the pre-crisis level of debt-to-GDP.The challenges are particularly large for countries with relatively high government deficit and debt levels, as well as a rapidly ageing society, and even more so for those that face relatively high interest rates and low potential growth.Outside the euro area, bringing the public debt ratio back to safer levels appears even harder for the United Kingdom, the United States and Japan. Given their high budget deficits and the high and rising debt levels, they must undertake very strong consolidation efforts to manage a reversal of the rising trend in public debt ratios. Why are these fiscal imbalances cause for such great concern? For three reasons. First, high levels of government budget deficits and debt may push inflation expectations up and place an additional burden on the monetary policy of central banks and their task of maintaining price stability. Second, large fiscal imbalances may drive up (real) medium and longer-term interest rates, with adverse consequences for private investment. Given the large debt-financing needs of many advanced countries, this constitutes a serious risk for the recovery. Moreover, rising interest expenditure on government debt reduces the scope for public spending on other, growth-enhancing items. Taken together, this would reduce long-term growth. The higher the debt ratio, the worse will be the impact. Third, deteriorated fiscal positions severely limit the ability of governments to counter adverse shocks, given the reduced budgetary room for the operation of automatic stabilizers. In addition, large budgetary imbalances reduce the scope for fiscal stimulus measures, and their effectiveness. A fiscal expansion in the context of high and rising government debt may trigger an increase in precautionary savings and counteract the expansionary impact.The onus is now on governments to ensure that the crisis that initially affected the financial sector, and subsequently the real economy, does not lead to a full-blown sovereign debt crisis. Averting it will require very ambitious and credible fiscal consolidation efforts. In fact, substantially stronger consolidation efforts than those conceived so far are needed to bring the debt ratio down towards sustainable levels of below 60% of GDP and to prepare for the rising budgetary costs of the ageing population.While fiscal consolidation may entail some costs in terms of lower economic growth in the short run, their longer-term benefits are largely undisputed. Such benefits come from a reduction of governments’ debt financing needs, leading both to lower long-term interest rates and to the release of revenues to finance more productive expenditure or growth-enhancing tax cuts. More leeway is then also created for the operation of automatic fiscal stabilisers in response to a cyclical downturn. In sum, fiscal consolidation is essential to secure public trust in the long-term sustainability of public finances, and to strengthen the foundations for sustained and durable growth.At the European level, fiscal consolidation should be in line with EU countries’ commitments under the Stability and Growth Pact, which provides the appropriate framework for the coordination of their fiscal policies. Given past experience of a slow and hesitant correction of excessive deficits, I see strong arguments for strengthening the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact and reinforcing its rules for fiscal discipline. This could be complemented with enhanced national budgetary rules and procedures that are consistent with the EU fiscal framework.The economic and fiscal consequences of the financial crisis pose extraordinary challenges for monetary policy.In response to the crisis and the ensuing subdued inflationary pressures, the Governing Council has lowered its key interest rates to historically low levels. In particular, it reduced its main refinancing rate by 325 basis points to 1%, a level not seen in recent history in any of the euro area countries. Overall, the Governing Council still views these low policy rates as appropriate.In addition to these interest rate cuts, the Governing Council also introduced a number of non-standard measures to foster financing conditions and facilitate the transmission of lower key ECB interest rates to money market and bank lending rates. Notably, the Eurosystem provided unlimited funding support to banks, at maturities of up to one year. It also provided liquidity in foreign currencies, extended the list of eligible collateral and purchased covered bonds outright. These measures have contributed not only to lowering perceived liquidity risks on the part of banks, but also to a better flow of credit to households and firms than would otherwise have been the case.The ECB’s approach differs from that of some other central banks in certain respects. First, our outright purchases of securities have focused on the covered bond market, a market segment that is very important in Europe and a primary source of financing for banks. Conversely, we have refrained from buying government bonds, which is what other central banks have done rather extensively. Second, rather than purchasing securities outright, we have relied primarily on repurchase agreements. As these repurchase agreements expire they will provide for a gradual phasing-out of our funding support to banks.From the very beginning, we have been aware of the fact that keeping our non-standard measures in place for longer than necessary would entail the danger of creating harmful distortions. Therefore, we designed the measures with exit considerations in mind. In view of the improvements in financial market conditions seen since last spring, we have started to gradually phase out some of them.More specifically, we have stopped providing liquidity in foreign currencies, and we have discontinued operations involving maturities longer than three months. While the Eurosystem will continue to provide liquidity support to the euro area banking system at very favourable conditions in its shorter-term refinancing operations, the refinancing operations at longer maturities will expire in the course of the year. What remains to be decided are, inter alia, the tender procedures to be applied in the main refinancing operations and the operations with a duration of one maintenance period, approximately one month. We do not know today what normality will look like after the crisis. Likewise, we cannot be specific today about the design of the “final” post-crisis operational framework. Before deciding on this, we will need to consider thoroughly the lessons to be learnt from the crisis. However, the operational framework that prevailed prior to the turmoil seems to provide a good benchmark. It served us well prior to the crisis, and could be adapted quickly as circumstances worsened. Let me conclude. The crisis is not over yet. Our liquidity measures have been key in improving funding conditions for banks and in forestalling a collapse in money and credit. We are now in a position to gradually unwind our measures. Banks are facing further write-downs, but balance sheet repairs have made some progress. Economic growth in the advanced economies will recover only gradually. Given the multi-speed character of this recovery at the global level, there is something of a question mark behind its sustainability, not only because of the re-emergence of current account and savings-investment imbalances, but also because of the buoyancy of asset price developments in some emerging market economies. Now is the time to adopt the structural economic adjustments to overcome these imbalances, both at home and abroad.Fiscal debt in advanced economies is, on average, approaching a level that is utterly unsustainable and needs to be swiftly and forcefully countered. This requires credible and very ambitious fiscal consolidation efforts. The tax burden is already too high in many countries. Fiscal adjustment will therefore have to be primarily expenditure-based, and it will need to be supported by structural reforms to boost potential output growth.Against this backdrop, let me stress that any call to reduce the real value of public debt through higher inflation will be firmly opposed by the ECB. Price stability is a prerequisite for confidence and sustainable growth. The Governing Council will not yield to anxiety about public indebtedness. It will continue to deliver on its mandate, which is to maintain price stability over the medium term. All our decisions regarding the phasing out of supportive measures need to be seen within this context. Thank you.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen autumn world economi enter worst financi crisi deepest recess sinc great depress monetari fiscal polici respond vigor except situat therebi support recent recoveri crisi yet challeng overcom forestal repetit still need fulli met mani question remain open much progress made improv stabil financi sector given dramat rise public debt especi advanc economi sovereign debt crisi follow crisi experienc financi sector current multispe recoveri econom growth global level sustain let start bank sector bank profit improv remain subdu creditrel writedown expect throughout year bank lower leverag ratio signific reduc riskweight asset discrimin visàvi riskier borrow pressur continu deleverag persist owe increas loan portfolio risk higher target capit ratio develop accord analysi led credit constraint economi larg rather sharp declin credit growth reflect even steeper declin econom growth experienc past quarter let turn econom develop global level econom activ expect grow around year global trade expect increas almost accord imf april weo strong growth emerg market economi asia major drive forc behind figur time advanc economi may face prospect protract period sluggish growth given financi crisi like advers affect growth potenti accord recent oecd studi financi crise oecd countri estim lower potenti output percent averag magnitud effect might signific larger case sever crisi histori guid also take note imf studi found advanc economi recess associ financi crise tend unusu sever longlast output take averag three year recov precrisi peak euro area recent inform indic recoveri continu expand first month year look forward euro area growth expect remain moder owe ongo balanc sheet adjust privat sector weak prospect labour market low capac utilis avail growth forecast put averag around crisi also expect last effect economi level growth rate potenti output like reduc long time diverg strength recoveri within across region expect persist recoveri unit state expect stronger advanc economi question sustain recoveri howev remain open given high unemploy continu high level household debt low save ongo tight credit condit advanc economi howev medium term expect per capita gdp growth euro area similar unit state case period differ averag annual gdp growth rate unit state euro area main due differ popul growth unit state euro area turn price develop euro area annual increas hicp harmonis index consum price increas march februari driven predomin rise commod price global increas commod price support dynam growth emerg market economi notwithstand inflat expect remain firm anchor line aim keep inflat rate close medium term expect inflat euro area remain moder policyrelev horizon outcom monetari analysi confirm assess low inflationari pressur medium term money credit growth remain weak therefor follow care develop period ahead particular price develop commod market emerg market economi impact global inflat trend also need monitor close possibl advers impact fiscal develop inflat outlook although respons policymak crisi certain help avert even dramat collaps econom activ euro area elsewher challeng abound particular concern dramat deterior public financ govern advanc countri exit recess highest deficit debttogdp ratio record time peac euro area accord latest project european commiss general govern deficit expect exceed gdp japan govern deficittogdp ratio foreseen reach around gdp year wherea uk us govern deficit expect excess gdp period high govern deficit reflect mount govern debt reach gdp euro area unit kingdom gdp unit state gdp japan develop consequ sizeabl fiscal stimulus measur intervent support financi institut mani advanc countri also bear testimoni sharp contract econom activ euro area fiscal develop becom major concern situat particular acut countri fail consolid public financ buoyant econom time problem specif euro area countri countri outsid euro area also adopt less prudent approach manag public financ current trend fiscal polici simpli sustain without ambiti fiscal adjust effort debt ratio project continu rise next decad annual structur deficit reduct gdp take euro area year return precrisi level debttogdp challeng particular larg countri relat high govern deficit debt level well rapid age societi even face relat high interest rate low potenti growth outsid euro area bring public debt ratio back safer level appear even harder unit kingdom unit state japan given high budget deficit high rise debt level must undertak strong consolid effort manag revers rise trend public debt ratio fiscal imbal caus great concern three reason first high level govern budget deficit debt may push inflat expect place addit burden monetari polici central bank task maintain price stabil second larg fiscal imbal may drive real medium longerterm interest rate advers consequ privat invest given larg debtfinanc need mani advanc countri constitut serious risk recoveri moreov rise interest expenditur govern debt reduc scope public spend growthenhanc item taken togeth would reduc longterm growth higher debt ratio wors impact third deterior fiscal posit sever limit abil govern counter advers shock given reduc budgetari room oper automat stabil addit larg budgetari imbal reduc scope fiscal stimulus measur effect fiscal expans context high rise govern debt may trigger increas precautionari save counteract expansionari impact onus govern ensur crisi initi affect financi sector subsequ real economi lead fullblown sovereign debt crisi avert requir ambiti credibl fiscal consolid effort fact substanti stronger consolid effort conceiv far need bring debt ratio toward sustain level gdp prepar rise budgetari cost age popul fiscal consolid may entail cost term lower econom growth short run longerterm benefit larg undisput benefit come reduct govern debt financ need lead lower longterm interest rate releas revenu financ product expenditur growthenhanc tax cut leeway also creat oper automat fiscal stabilis respons cyclic downturn sum fiscal consolid essenti secur public trust longterm sustain public financ strengthen foundat sustain durabl growth european level fiscal consolid line eu countri commit stabil growth pact provid appropri framework coordin fiscal polici given past experi slow hesit correct excess deficit see strong argument strengthen implement stabil growth pact reinforc rule fiscal disciplin could complement enhanc nation budgetari rule procedur consist eu fiscal framework econom fiscal consequ financi crisi pose extraordinari challeng monetari polici respons crisi ensu subdu inflationari pressur govern council lower key interest rate histor low level particular reduc main refinanc rate basi point level seen recent histori euro area countri overal govern council still view low polici rate appropri addit interest rate cut govern council also introduc number nonstandard measur foster financ condit facilit transmiss lower key ecb interest rate money market bank lend rate notabl eurosystem provid unlimit fund support bank matur one year also provid liquid foreign currenc extend list elig collater purchas cover bond outright measur contribut lower perceiv liquid risk part bank also better flow credit household firm would otherwis case ecb approach differ central bank certain respect first outright purchas secur focus cover bond market market segment import europ primari sourc financ bank convers refrain buy govern bond central bank done rather extens second rather purchas secur outright reli primarili repurchas agreement repurchas agreement expir provid gradual phasingout fund support bank begin awar fact keep nonstandard measur place longer necessari would entail danger creat harm distort therefor design measur exit consider mind view improv financi market condit seen sinc last spring start gradual phase specif stop provid liquid foreign currenc discontinu oper involv matur longer three month eurosystem continu provid liquid support euro area bank system favour condit shorterterm refinanc oper refinanc oper longer matur expir cours year remain decid inter alia tender procedur appli main refinanc oper oper durat one mainten period approxim one month know today normal look like crisi likewis cannot specif today design final postcrisi oper framework decid need consid thorough lesson learnt crisi howev oper framework prevail prior turmoil seem provid good benchmark serv us well prior crisi could adapt quick circumst worsen let conclud crisi yet liquid measur key improv fund condit bank forestal collaps money credit posit gradual unwind measur bank face writedown balanc sheet repair made progress econom growth advanc economi recov gradual given multispe charact recoveri global level someth question mark behind sustain reemerg current account savingsinvest imbal also buoyanc asset price develop emerg market economi time adopt structur econom adjust overcom imbal home abroad fiscal debt advanc economi averag approach level utter unsustain need swift forc counter requir credibl ambiti fiscal consolid effort tax burden alreadi high mani countri fiscal adjust therefor primarili expenditurebas need support structur reform boost potenti output growth backdrop let stress call reduc real valu public debt higher inflat firm oppos ecb price stabil prerequisit confid sustain growth govern council yield anxieti public indebted continu deliv mandat maintain price stabil medium term decis regard phase support measur need seen within context thank reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en