Jean-Claude Trichet: Some reflections on the development of credit derivatives,18-04-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,3476,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,It is a privilege and pleasure to be here at the 22nd ISDA Annual General Meeting in Boston in front of such a distinguished global audience. Looking back at what is already history, I would like to express my gratitude to ISDA for its substantial contribution towards the smooth introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999. The conversion of the original 11 national currencies into one single currency, the euro, represented an enormous operational and legal challenge that had significant implications for the global markets, particularly for the cross-currency and interest rate derivatives markets. ISDA played an important role in contributing to the development of the legal framework which ensured the continuity of contracts, both in the European Union and in the United States. I would also like to mention the crucial role that ISDA currently plays in promoting the smooth functioning of all derivatives market segments, especially by mitigating legal risks and supporting industry-driven initiatives to promote market integrity and efficiency. I will come back to this point later. The main theme of my speech today is credit derivatives, in their different forms. The credit derivatives market segment has probably been one of the most innovative and fastest-growing in recent years. Most notably, during the last mid-year review, ISDA recorded a 52% rise in the notional outstanding amount of credit default swaps, which rose to $26 trillion. Moreover, according to the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, the issuance of collateralised debt obligations almost tripled between 2004 and 2006, amounting to $489 billion in 2006. The rapid development and the share of this market segment is a very important feature of today’s global finance, and I would like to share with you some reflections on the developments of credit derivatives.My objective is twofold: first, I would like to emphasise the importance of central banks’ monitoring of developments in credit derivatives in terms of three interlinked perspectives: the conduct of monetary policy, financial stability and market standards.  Second, I would like to take advantage of your AGM to make a call in favour of market-driven initiatives that may lead to greater transparency. Let me now turn to the development of credit derivatives from a monetary policy perspective. Empirical evidence and theoretical reasoning on this subject are admittedly still limited. However, there is growing consensus that credit derivatives have implications for the conduct of monetary policy. The question I will try to address is: do credit derivatives affect the  monetary policy transmission mechanism? Let me first say that the precise impact is difficult to estimate at this stage, given the scarcity of reliable data. It could be argued that there may be changes in the nature of the credit channel of monetary policy, which can be divided into a “bank lending” and a “borrower balance sheet” channel. The nature of the traditional bank lending channel is probably changing progressively owing to technological innovations, which have significantly enhanced the ability of banks to grant credit. However, it is still too early to assess in what way this channel may be affected.The so-called borrower balance sheet channel focuses, instead, on the impact which changes in the policy rate have on the premium between external and internal finance. This channel traditionally worked because monetary policy decisions typically drive changes in bank lending spreads and, more recently have also affected corporate bond spreads. [1] Nowadays rates on credit default swaps may also play a crucial role. Indeed, some empirical evidence shows that credit derivatives’ premia respond more to changes in the availability and cost of financing compared with corporate bond spreads. [2] Credit derivatives could therefore make the economy, and thus monetary policy, increasingly sensitive to credit market movements. At the same time, credit derivatives’ activity increases the information on borrowers’ default risk and may contribute to compressing the external finance premium. In fact, three structural implications emanating from the use of credit derivatives might have affected the monetary policy transmission mechanism. First, credit derivatives and structured credit markets affect banks’ decision-making processes when granting credit. [3] Just consider in this regard the enhanced capability to manage both pricing and liquidity risks. Price discovery in the credit derivatives market reduces the risk of mispricing loans. Moreover, securitisation, which is another credit risk transfer instrument, offers the possibility of managing more effectively the liquidity risk of traditionally illiquid loans in the balance sheet.  Second, credit derivatives and structured credit markets are transforming the way banks operate in the market. Credit portfolio management practices have indeed profound implications for the banking business model. Banks are moving from the traditional “buy-and-hold” model to the “originate-and-distribute” model [4], whereby they distribute portfolios of credit risks and assets to other market players.In this respect, banks are increasingly performing the role of risk managers in addition to pure credit providers. In particular, they increasingly find credit derivatives a highly attractive mechanism for reducing exposure concentrations in their loan books, while simultaneously allowing them to meet the needs of their corporate customers. The third structural implication is that credit derivatives and structured credit markets are transforming the financial system, whereby efficient risk allocation is becoming just as important as capital allocation. It is a valid question to wonder if we are converging towards a new “integrated” financial system, whereby the traditional categories of bank-based or market-based financial systems may have to be revisited. Such an integrated system could be built on the competitive advantages of different market participants. On the one hand, banks would still maintain their superior capability to assess and originate idiosyncratic credit risk and risky assets, provided of course that informational advantages and the appropriate incentives to screen borrowers remain in place. On the other hand, subsequent aggregation and structuring of credit risks would increasingly allow these risks to be transferred to market participants with different investment horizons, asset/liability structures and risk appetites who may be less vulnerable than banks in terms of managing liquidity, interest rate and systemic credit risks. Overall, these three structural implications of credit derivatives may have brought about increased opportunities and productivity in the banking intermediation business, which in turn implies a substantial reduction in costs. Whether this partially explains the fast growth of bank loans in the euro area, which exceeds what can be explained on the basis of traditional determinants, is a conjecture which to me seems reasonable, albeit one that has still to be substantiated. Indeed, some evidence from the United States, based on individual loan data, supports the idea that banks are increasing the supply of credit as they obtain additional credit protection through credit derivatives. [5] A consequence of the possible impact of credit derivatives on the monetary policy transmission mechanism is that central banks have to adapt their market monitoring and analytical tools [6]  June 2004 marked a significant milestone in the world of credit risk, with the launch of the two single European and US credit default swap indices, iTraxx and CDX. Credit risk has now become a separate asset class, and price discovery for this risk is increasingly taking place in the derivatives market segment, as it has been the case for interest rate and inflation risk. Let me now consider credit derivatives from a financial stability perspective. There is growing consensus [7] that the flexibility provided by derivatives, whereby risks can be traded separately, has the potential to facilitate risk-sharing, to enhance the efficiency of risk management, and to promote market completeness. Credit derivatives, in particular, may offer investors a tool enabling them to exploit their comparative advantage in terms of assuming different types of risk as well as the corresponding remuneration for these risks. As already stated, banks are using credit risk transfer instruments, including securitisation, to distribute credit risk exposures acquired in their lending business to non-banks. All innovations, however, encompass advantages as well as risks.. The core question is under what conditions do credit derivatives enhance the resilience of the financial system.I believe that at least three conditions need to be fulfilled under both normal and stressed market conditions: first, risks must be accurately measured and priced; second, risks must be properly managed; third, an appropriate heterogeneity of both investors’ behaviour and risk appetite must be preserved in all market circumstances in order for trading and sharing of risk to preserve liquidity even under stressed market conditions – so-called systemic liquidity. [8] Taking an extreme scenario, if all investors were to attempt to take the same position at the same time, then the homogeneity of their behaviour would cause liquidity to evaporate. Assuming these three conditions are fulfilled, the possibility of trading risks separately will result in their better allocation, making the financial system more resilient. However, we are at present not sure that the three conditions are indeed always met. In particular, as the instruments for sharing credit risk have not yet really been stress-tested, it is extremely difficult to ascertain the resilience of the market accurately. Aggressive investors display a more volatile risk-taking attitude, and their balance sheets are not necessarily resilient enough to withstand major shocks or increases in volatility. In response to unanticipated events, their investment strategies may react in a way that can suddenly lead to dangerous herding behaviour and/or counterparty risk problems for banks. Such situations are also a matter of concern from a systemic liquidity viewpoint, and may take two extreme forms: market liquidity could temporarily dry up or individual funding liquidity problems may affect a significant market player. [9] Such liquidity problems are typically low-probability events, but the potential loss to the financial system if they were to materialise is great. In today’s financial markets, the fear is that a large proportion of market participants may have become excessively complacent; a situation which may well have been exacerbated by high levels of liquidity, the stability of which is difficult to predict. What then can be done to enjoy the advantages of credit derivatives, while simultaneously minimising the systemic risks they could generate?  First, we need to understand what the main problem is. Here, it should be acknowledged that the opacity of the credit derivatives market, and especially of structured synthetic instruments, is a potential source of concern. The complex interaction between cash instruments and credit derivatives has made it increasingly difficult to monitor where different, possibly sizeable, positions are taken and where risks are concentrated. It is similarly difficult to monitor whether and when simultaneous attempts by market participants to unwind their positions could have an impact on market prices and systemic liquidity. [10] It is therefore becoming increasingly important for risk managers, in both the private and the public sectors to understand which risks are being accumulated by what financial entities.  Second, since there is no simple solution to the problem of opacity, what is the right direction to take? The challenge is to work towards an adequate transparency framework. More and improved data on net credit risk exposures and on the concentration of positions – which tend to build up easily in highly leveraged and opaque markets – could help to mitigate sizeable shortcomings in both counterparty and systemic liquidity risk management. In fact, such data could help market participants and competent authorities to value, price and manage more effectively the increasing risks posed when investors behave in a homogenous way. However, it is important to note that there is as yet no broad consensus on how such a framework would be best implemented in order to provide timely and relevant information. Third, who should take action in this direction? It should be acknowledged that the reduction of systemic risk is not an objective for central banks exclusively. Here, I would like to praise the joint initiatives of market experts from a number of leading institutions around the world in response to calls from the central bank community: the reports by the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group [11] and the recent report released by the Institute of International Finance Special Committee on Liquidity Risk. Both documents call for “greater transparency and an incremental collaborative mechanism between the public and private sector in contingency planning”. They also draw attention to the fact that standard methods for valuing contracts with defaulting counterparties under the close-out netting provisions of master agreements for derivatives transactions could be difficult to implement during periods of market stress. As noted by the Basel Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, market associations such as ISDA are well placed to develop common understandings regarding the use of these methodologies, taking into account existing market practices and laws.In addition, there is also scope for more private and public sector cooperation on stress-testing and gathering data that are relevant for regulatory purposes concerning the proper evaluation of systemic risk. For instance, the work on stress-testing by regulators, central banks and international organisations (such as the IMF’s Financial Sector Assessment Programme activities), has revealed the difficulties for banks to introduce into their internal models a) scenarios which affect systemic liquidity, or b) assumptions on the behaviour/failure of large market participants under stress. Fourth, how can we move forward? On the one hand, policy-makers are increasingly acknowledging the risk of a certain trade-off between liquidity and transparency in the credit derivatives market when the transparency framework is inappropriately designed. This can materialise under normal conditions but also under stressed conditions. To avoid the emergence of this trade-off requires a careful understanding of the market microstructure and its functioning, in order to build a transparency framework which can be adapted to the global, dynamic and complex nature of the credit risk transfer market. On the other hand, expectations with regard to market-driven initiatives are growing, which is a point that I will consider again later. In any case, it is crucial to bear in mind that the problem is not credit derivatives instruments per se, but how they are used, and especially the size, distribution and concentration of risks they allow. Increased transparency on these three issues could be useful for risk managers in both the private and public sectors, and for the market in general. Let me now move to the third and last point, namely to try to understand the main developments in credit derivatives with regard to market practices Given that the credit derivatives market has a global, innovative, complex and predominantly wholesale nature, it may be argued that global market standards are particularly well suited to meet related regulatory challenges. ISDA is widely recognised as playing a crucial role in promoting market standards and mitigating legal risk. In this regard, there can be no doubt that the development of ISDA’s library of standard-form contracts for credit derivatives has played a substantial role in promoting the development of this market. It is important that market participants clearly understand the precise rights and obligations which they assume when entering into credit derivatives transactions, as standardised contracts do not always work out in the way that contracting parties anticipate. Also, in some instances, case law has demonstrated that the courts can take divergent views regarding the meaning of ISDA’s definitions of credit derivatives. These matters have been swiftly addressed by ISDA.Turning to the overarching legal framework within which these standard-form contracts operate, the legal enforceability of close-out netting and collateral arrangements plays a central role in the smooth functioning of all over-the-counter derivatives markets, reducing counterparty risk. The need for a high degree of legal certainty regarding the validity and enforceability of such arrangements has long been reflected in the regulatory capital requirements under the Basel Capital Accords. Legislative recognition of close-out netting and collateral arrangements plays a positive role in supporting the evolution of derivatives markets. I note that the European Commission, echoing the views of the European Financial Market Lawyers Group and ISDA, has recently stated that it intends to explore the possibility of further improving the general EU framework for netting. Concerning other relevant ongoing initiatives, I would like to recall the current debate on international accounting standards. The ECB is contributing to the debate [12] and is aware that accounting standards can have a significant impact on the financial system, in particular via their potential influence on the behaviour of economic agents. The ECB’s opinion is that the introduction of the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), if implemented consistently and reliably, should lead to a substantial increase in comparability and transparency. This should enhance the level playing-field between banking institutions and strengthen market discipline. In this way, the IFRS can also provide various stakeholders with some early warning signals concerning exposures or risks. This holds particularly true for investment banking activities and for the use of risk transfer instruments. Finally, I would like to return to my second objective today, and raise some suggestions on possible future market-driven initiatives, especially regarding transparency. These questions directly follow from what I said earlier about the risks of opaque markets.The credit derivatives market is of a global nature, and the ECB welcomes joint initiatives driven by market participants. Is there scope in these initiatives for enhanced transparency? What are the obstacles to making available, in a form that also considers the impact on systemic liquidity, individual volumes of single name credit default swaps as well as regularly surveying net credit risk exposures and concentration of positions? The ISDA initiative in conducting a survey on concentration risk in early 2004 might, for example, may be worth revisiting in this regard. Moreover, there have recently been some market-driven initiatives which resulted in a consolidation of post-trade information, such as the DTCC trade information warehouse. In view of these initiatives, is there not a business case for investigating how relevant information can allow the private sector to monitor, value and manage trade concentration risks more effectively? I strongly believe in responsible private sector initiative. In the global, dynamic, and complex credit derivatives market, industry initiatives are of the essence. Therefore the ECB seeks to encourage joint initiatives to promote transparency, especially to: reduce pricing risks for illiquid products, enhance risk management capabilities, and support market discipline regarding counterparty risks, especially non-regulated entities. Thank you very much for your attention. Angeloni, I., Kashyap, A. and Mojon, B. (eds.) (2003), “Monetary Policy Transmission in the Euro Area”, Cambridge University Press.Bondt, G.J. de (2004), “The balance sheet channel of monetary policy: first empirical evidence for the euro area corporate bond market”, International Journal of Finance and Economics, Volume 9, Issue 3, pp. 219-228.CGFS-BIS (2003), “Credit risk transfer”, Committee on the Global Financial System, January.Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group II (2005), “Toward greater financial stability: A private sector perspective”, July. De Nederlandsche Bank (2002), “Credit growth underestimated owing to increasing securitisations”, Statistical Bulletin, December, pp. 17-21. Donald L. Kohn (2007), “Asset-pricing puzzles, credit risk, and credit derivatives” Central Bank Articles and Speeches, March. Vice-Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System, at the Conference on Credit Risk and Credit Derivatives, Washington, D.C.ECB, “Credit risk transfer by EU banks: activities, risks and risk management”, May 2004.ECB, “Assessment of accounting standards from a financial stability perspective”, December 2006.ECB, “Corporate finance in the euro area”, 2007 (forthcoming).Estrella, A. (2002), “Securitization and the Efficacy of Monetary Policy”. Economic Policy Review, Volume 8, No 1. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York. May, pp. 243-255.FitchRatings, Global Credit Derivatives Survey, September 2006. Geithner, “Implications of Growth in Credit Derivatives for Financial Stability”, President and Chief Executive Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 16 May 2006.Hirtle, B. (2007), “Credit Derivatives and Bank Credit Supply”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No 276, February.IMF Global Financial Stability Report, “The influence of credit derivative and structured credit markets on financial stability”, Chapter II, April 2006.Institute of International Finance (2007), “Principles of Liquidity Risk Management”, March. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, The Joint Forum (2006), “The management of liquidity risk in financial groups”, May.Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, The Joint Forum (2005), “Credit Risk Transfer”, March.Marco Laganá, Martin Peřina, Isabel von Köppen-Mertes and Avinash Persaud, “Implications for liquidity from innovation and transparency in the European corporate bond market” ECB Occasional Paper No 50, August 2006. Nout Wellink (2007), “Risk management & financial stability – Basel II & beyond” President of De Nederlandsche Bank and Chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the GARP 2007 8th Annual Risk Management Convention & Exhibition, New York, 27 February.Speyer, B. (2006), “Credit derivatives – short-term challenges and long-term implications”, Journal of Financial Transformation, Volume 16, pp. 143-152.Zhu, H. (2006), “An empirical comparison of credit spreads between the bond market and the credit default swap market”, Journal of Financial Services Research, Volume 29, No 3 / June, pp. 211-235.[1] de Bondt (2004). [2] Zhu (2006).[3] See also ECB (2004), ECB (2007) and CGFS (2003).[4] ECB, Financial Stability Review, Box 12, December 2006. See also Welling (2007).[5] Hirtle (2007).[6] See also Kohn (2007).[7] See, for example, IMF GFSR (2005), Geithner FED of NY (2006).[8] See Laganá et al. ECB (2006) and ECB Financial Stability Review, Box 9, December 2006.[9] See Institute of International Finance (2007) and Joint Forum (2006) for further details and definitions.[10] ECB Financial Stability Review, June 2006.[11] Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group II (2005).[12] ECB (2006).Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen privileg pleasur nd isda annual general meet boston front distinguish global audienc look back alreadi histori would like express gratitud isda substanti contribut toward smooth introduct euro januari convers origin nation currenc one singl currenc euro repres enorm oper legal challeng signific implic global market particular crosscurr interest rate deriv market isda play import role contribut develop legal framework ensur continu contract european union unit state would also like mention crucial role isda current play promot smooth function deriv market segment especi mitig legal risk support industrydriven initi promot market integr effici come back point later main theme speech today credit deriv differ form credit deriv market segment probabl one innov fastestgrow recent year notabl last midyear review isda record rise notion outstand amount credit default swap rose trillion moreov accord secur industri financi market associ issuanc collateralis debt oblig almost tripl amount billion rapid develop share market segment import featur today global financ would like share reflect develop credit deriv object twofold first would like emphasis import central bank monitor develop credit deriv term three interlink perspect conduct monetari polici financi stabil market standard second would like take advantag agm make call favour marketdriven initi may lead greater transpar let turn develop credit deriv monetari polici perspect empir evid theoret reason subject admit still limit howev grow consensus credit deriv implic conduct monetari polici question tri address credit deriv affect monetari polici transmiss mechan let first say precis impact difficult estim stage given scarciti reliabl data could argu may chang natur credit channel monetari polici divid bank lend borrow balanc sheet channel natur tradit bank lend channel probabl chang progress owe technolog innov signific enhanc abil bank grant credit howev still earli assess way channel may affect socal borrow balanc sheet channel focus instead impact chang polici rate premium extern intern financ channel tradit work monetari polici decis typic drive chang bank lend spread recent also affect corpor bond spread nowaday rate credit default swap may also play crucial role inde empir evid show credit deriv premia respond chang avail cost financ compar corpor bond spread credit deriv could therefor make economi thus monetari polici increas sensit credit market movement time credit deriv activ increas inform borrow default risk may contribut compress extern financ premium fact three structur implic eman use credit deriv might affect monetari polici transmiss mechan first credit deriv structur credit market affect bank decisionmak process grant credit consid regard enhanc capabl manag price liquid risk price discoveri credit deriv market reduc risk mispric loan moreov securitis anoth credit risk transfer instrument offer possibl manag effect liquid risk tradit illiquid loan balanc sheet second credit deriv structur credit market transform way bank oper market credit portfolio manag practic inde profound implic bank busi model bank move tradit buyandhold model originateanddistribut model wherebi distribut portfolio credit risk asset market player respect bank increas perform role risk manag addit pure credit provid particular increas find credit deriv high attract mechan reduc exposur concentr loan book simultan allow meet need corpor custom third structur implic credit deriv structur credit market transform financi system wherebi effici risk alloc becom import capit alloc valid question wonder converg toward new integr financi system wherebi tradit categori bankbas marketbas financi system may revisit integr system could built competit advantag differ market particip one hand bank would still maintain superior capabl assess origin idiosyncrat credit risk riski asset provid cours inform advantag appropri incent screen borrow remain place hand subsequ aggreg structur credit risk would increas allow risk transfer market particip differ invest horizon assetli structur risk appetit may less vulner bank term manag liquid interest rate system credit risk overal three structur implic credit deriv may brought increas opportun product bank intermedi busi turn impli substanti reduct cost whether partial explain fast growth bank loan euro area exceed explain basi tradit determin conjectur seem reason albeit one still substanti inde evid unit state base individu loan data support idea bank increas suppli credit obtain addit credit protect credit deriv consequ possibl impact credit deriv monetari polici transmiss mechan central bank adapt market monitor analyt tool june mark signific mileston world credit risk launch two singl european us credit default swap indic itraxx cdx credit risk becom separ asset class price discoveri risk increas take place deriv market segment case interest rate inflat risk let consid credit deriv financi stabil perspect grow consensus flexibl provid deriv wherebi risk trade separ potenti facilit riskshar enhanc effici risk manag promot market complet credit deriv particular may offer investor tool enabl exploit compar advantag term assum differ type risk well correspond remuner risk alreadi state bank use credit risk transfer instrument includ securitis distribut credit risk exposur acquir lend busi nonbank innov howev encompass advantag well risk core question condit credit deriv enhanc resili financi system believ least three condit need fulfil normal stress market condit first risk must accur measur price second risk must proper manag third appropri heterogen investor behaviour risk appetit must preserv market circumst order trade share risk preserv liquid even stress market condit socal system liquid take extrem scenario investor attempt take posit time homogen behaviour would caus liquid evapor assum three condit fulfil possibl trade risk separ result better alloc make financi system resili howev present sure three condit inde alway met particular instrument share credit risk yet realli stresstest extrem difficult ascertain resili market accur aggress investor display volatil risktak attitud balanc sheet necessarili resili enough withstand major shock increas volatil respons unanticip event invest strategi may react way sudden lead danger herd behaviour andor counterparti risk problem bank situat also matter concern system liquid viewpoint may take two extrem form market liquid could temporarili dri individu fund liquid problem may affect signific market player liquid problem typic lowprob event potenti loss financi system materialis great today financi market fear larg proport market particip may becom excess complac situat may well exacerb high level liquid stabil difficult predict done enjoy advantag credit deriv simultan minimis system risk could generat first need understand main problem acknowledg opac credit deriv market especi structur synthet instrument potenti sourc concern complex interact cash instrument credit deriv made increas difficult monitor differ possibl sizeabl posit taken risk concentr similar difficult monitor whether simultan attempt market particip unwind posit could impact market price system liquid therefor becom increas import risk manag privat public sector understand risk accumul financi entiti second sinc simpl solut problem opac right direct take challeng work toward adequ transpar framework improv data net credit risk exposur concentr posit tend build easili high leverag opaqu market could help mitig sizeabl shortcom counterparti system liquid risk manag fact data could help market particip compet author valu price manag effect increas risk pose investor behav homogen way howev import note yet broad consensus framework would best implement order provid time relev inform third take action direct acknowledg reduct system risk object central bank exclus would like prais joint initi market expert number lead institut around world respons call central bank communiti report counterparti risk manag polici group recent report releas institut intern financ special committe liquid risk document call greater transpar increment collabor mechan public privat sector conting plan also draw attent fact standard method valu contract default counterparti closeout net provis master agreement deriv transact could difficult implement period market stress note basel committe payment settlement system market associ isda well place develop common understand regard use methodolog take account exist market practic law addit also scope privat public sector cooper stresstest gather data relev regulatori purpos concern proper evalu system risk instanc work stresstest regul central bank intern organis imf financi sector assess programm activ reveal difficulti bank introduc intern model scenario affect system liquid b assumpt behaviourfailur larg market particip stress fourth move forward one hand policymak increas acknowledg risk certain tradeoff liquid transpar credit deriv market transpar framework inappropri design materialis normal condit also stress condit avoid emerg tradeoff requir care understand market microstructur function order build transpar framework adapt global dynam complex natur credit risk transfer market hand expect regard marketdriven initi grow point consid later case crucial bear mind problem credit deriv instrument per se use especi size distribut concentr risk allow increas transpar three issu could use risk manag privat public sector market general let move third last point name tri understand main develop credit deriv regard market practic given credit deriv market global innov complex predomin wholesal natur may argu global market standard particular well suit meet relat regulatori challeng isda wide recognis play crucial role promot market standard mitig legal risk regard doubt develop isda librari standardform contract credit deriv play substanti role promot develop market import market particip clear understand precis right oblig assum enter credit deriv transact standardis contract alway work way contract parti anticip also instanc case law demonstr court take diverg view regard mean isda definit credit deriv matter swift address isda turn overarch legal framework within standardform contract oper legal enforc closeout net collater arrang play central role smooth function overthecount deriv market reduc counterparti risk need high degre legal certainti regard valid enforc arrang long reflect regulatori capit requir basel capit accord legisl recognit closeout net collater arrang play posit role support evolut deriv market note european commiss echo view european financi market lawyer group isda recent state intend explor possibl improv general eu framework net concern relev ongo initi would like recal current debat intern account standard ecb contribut debat awar account standard signific impact financi system particular via potenti influenc behaviour econom agent ecb opinion introduct intern financi report standard ifr implement consist reliabl lead substanti increas compar transpar enhanc level playingfield bank institut strengthen market disciplin way ifr also provid various stakehold earli warn signal concern exposur risk hold particular true invest bank activ use risk transfer instrument final would like return second object today rais suggest possibl futur marketdriven initi especi regard transpar question direct follow said earlier risk opaqu market credit deriv market global natur ecb welcom joint initi driven market particip scope initi enhanc transpar obstacl make avail form also consid impact system liquid individu volum singl name credit default swap well regular survey net credit risk exposur concentr posit isda initi conduct survey concentr risk earli might exampl may worth revisit regard moreov recent marketdriven initi result consolid posttrad inform dtcc trade inform warehous view initi busi case investig relev inform allow privat sector monitor valu manag trade concentr risk effect strong believ respons privat sector initi global dynam complex credit deriv market industri initi essenc therefor ecb seek encourag joint initi promot transpar especi reduc price risk illiquid product enhanc risk manag capabl support market disciplin regard counterparti risk especi nonregul entiti thank much attent angeloni kashyap mojon b ed monetari polici transmiss euro area cambridg univers press bondt g j de balanc sheet channel monetari polici first empir evid euro area corpor bond market intern journal financ econom volum issu pp cgfsbis credit risk transfer committe global financi system januari counterparti risk manag polici group ii toward greater financi stabil privat sector perspect juli de nederlandsch bank credit growth underestim owe increas securitis statist bulletin decemb pp donald l kohn assetpr puzzl credit risk credit deriv central bank articl speech march vicechairman board governor us feder reserv system confer credit risk credit deriv washington d c ecb credit risk transfer eu bank activ risk risk manag may ecb assess account standard financi stabil perspect decemb ecb corpor financ euro area forthcom estrella securit efficaci monetari polici econom polici review volum new york feder reserv bank new york may pp fitchrat global credit deriv survey septemb geithner implic growth credit deriv financi stabil presid chief execut offic feder reserv bank new york may hirtl b credit deriv bank credit suppli feder reserv bank new york staff report februari imf global financi stabil report influenc credit deriv structur credit market financi stabil chapter ii april institut intern financ principl liquid risk manag march basel committe bank supervis joint forum manag liquid risk financi group may basel committe bank supervis joint forum credit risk transfer march marco laganá peřina isabel von köppenmert avinash persaud implic liquid innov transpar european corpor bond market ecb occasion paper august nout wellink risk manag financi stabil basel ii beyond presid de nederlandsch bank chairman basel committe bank supervis garp th annual risk manag convent exhibit new york februari speyer b credit deriv shortterm challeng longterm implic journal financi transform volum pp zhu h empir comparison credit spread bond market credit default swap market journal financi servic research volum june pp de bondt zhu see also ecb ecb cgfs ecb financi stabil review box decemb see also well hirtl see also kohn see exampl imf gfsr geithner fed ny see laganá et al ecb ecb financi stabil review box decemb see institut intern financ joint forum detail definit ecb financi stabil review june counterparti risk manag polici group ii ecb reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en