Jean-Claude Trichet: Risk and the Macro-economy,05-09-2008,European Central Bank,ECB,9098,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,After an extended period of ample financial market liquidity and exceptionally low rewards for risk, the loss in the value of important classes of real assets has imparted a sharp deterioration in investor appetite. Rises in commodity prices, by eroding consumers’ purchasing power and real income prospects, have reinforced households’ risk aversion. A long phase of heightened risk tolerance in our economies has come to an end. To the extent that the more recent turns in the markets correct past excesses, this is a welcome – if painful – process that we had anticipated and asked market participants to prepare for in past interventions. At the same time, the decline in the compensation for risk that the recent turmoil has partly reversed is not a recent development. It started a quarter of a century ago, in tandem with – and probably reflecting – what seems to have been a persistent decline in macroeconomic uncertainty. So, to the extent that this moderation in macroeconomic fluctuations – in aggregate risk – would be confirmed as a permanent acquisition of modern economies, there is some reason to believe that the trend to lower risk valuations – beyond the needed corrections of the more recent excesses – could in the end reassert itself. In this talk I will reflect upon some evidence that lies at the heart of the mechanisms through which risk valuation makes contact with real economic decisions. The ultimate aim of my reflections is to find hints about the fundamental value of risk. Theories, for which I have some sympathy, have it that there is a historical break in risk valuation in the markets, and the realisation of that break largely mirrors structural developments in the balance between savings and investment on a global scale. China’s phenomenal growth in domestic manufacturing capacity and income production was not matched by an equi-proportional growth in domestic spending capacity – so Chinese savings grew ahead of even the dramatic pace at which domestic investment has expanded. At the same time, the aftermaths of the East Asian crisis brought about an “investment strike” in many economies bordering on the Asian Pacific, and taught authorities in those countries that bigger liquidity buffers – denominated in safe Western currencies – were needed to defend themselves against the volatile behaviour of foreign private investors. Finally, international financial markets were called upon – once again – to recycle the massive hard-currency balances that were being accumulated by commodity exporting countries. All this has made saving – and wealth – abundant ex ante relative to investment and income. And has led to a downside adjustment in the rewards that investors can claim to receive in compensation for their finance. These developments at time have dominated the financial landscape. But the breaks in the evolution of the market rewards for risk on which I will focus date long before the rise of the Asian economies and the increase in commodity prices. So, I will search for a fundamental connection between financial risk and macroeconomic performance in the developed countries, which will be the focus of my remarks. What is the direction of this link? Does the Great Moderation determine the quantum of risk traded in the markets? Or does the price of risk determined in the financial markets contribute and partly determine those fluctuations? And what is structural in this link – and thus likely to persist beyond short-term volatilities – and what is transient? A complete understanding of these relations would bring invaluable insights for policy considerations. For one thing, the centrepiece of dynamic macroeconomics is the equation of savings to investment. Asset prices – and the risk remuneration that they embody – are the mechanisms that do all this equating. Therefore, sustained movements in risk premia of the size that we have seen in the past quarter of a century are bound to have important implications for the allocation of consumption and investment across times and states of nature, and for the determination of aggregate demand at any point in time and in any economic state. I will also mention new – to some extent unknown – forms of interactions between financial markets and the real economy. One possibility that many observers have contemplated is that the prices determined in the market for key factors of production – such as energy or other commodities – might be increasingly influenced by forces and trading strategies that are motivated by the financial drive toward portfolio diversification, beside the desire to secure access to a physical delivery. Again, the way these markets might be pricing financial risk might make the interpretation of those prices more difficult. Unfortunately, my conclusion is that the state of our knowledge is not advanced enough to draw definitive conclusions about the nature and the directions of influences between risk pricing and the macro-economy. I will nevertheless submit my conjectures and lay out some basic behavioural principles that could help policymakers minimise major losses amid the uncertainty surrounding the current economic juncture. I also appeal to the many distinguished scholars that sit in front of me today to concentrate their minds to elucidate these relations. There is no univocal way to assess whether asset values are high or low relative to economic norms. Popular commentary often focuses on price indices and how they deviate from long-term averages. But, of course, index levels can vary because of general price inflation, or growth in the real economy, or changes in the size of publicly traded assets relative to the economy. So, it is customary for analysts to scale asset prices in various ways. A summary statistic of valuations that abstracts from scaling problems is the “asset risk premium”, or the rate of excess return investors expect to earn over the long run from their investment at current prices. [1] If the asset generates uncertain payoffs, investors ask to be compensated for this risk, which they would not bear if they chose to hold a competiting security with comparatively more predictable returns. The risk premium represents this reward. For a given stream of expected cash flows, a higher risk premium today signals a diminished willingness to hold the risky asset or, equivalently, a higher required return for doing so. Higher returns can be generated only by future price appreciation from a lower current price. So, an increase in the premium today is associated with a capital loss in the form of a drop in the current price of the asset. Conversely, a low premium signals a high current price relative to the expected income stream discounted at the risk-free rate.The risk premium measures the attractiveness of a risky investment relative to risk-free alternatives. Indirectly, it is a measure of the market’s appetite for investment risk. These figures [Figures 1a, 2a and 3] document the basic facts that constitute the subject of my considerations on the risk and the macro-economy. I focus here on estimates of the risk premia paid on four important asset classes: equity, houses, government bonds and corporate credit securities. They span the four markets for external finance that are most critical to the functioning of modern economies: the market for capital, installed in businesses and in residential establishments, and the market for credit, to government and corporate borrowers. I use US and euro area observations, whenever these are available, but international evidence broadly confirms this picture. And I concentrate on the last quarter of a century when the movements which I shall reflect upon are most evident. What do we see in these pictures? Two things: First, if I emphasise trends rather than waves, I see that risk premia on a representative spectrum of assets have declined more or less consistently since the middle of the 1980s. This is another way to say that the market price of those assets has tended to appreciate relative to the stream of their expected payoffs, discounted at the risk-free rate. Second, looking at higher-frequency movements around trends, I notice a turnaround in some financial series toward the end of the period. In particular, equity and credit financing has become more costly for firms to obtain, as the risk premia required for holding stocks and credit securities have recently bounced back from the lows achieved earlier. The upswing in the equity risk premium came first. The violent reversal in the credit risk premia is even more recent history.Understanding these trends and co-movements is an important pre-condition for any inference we need to draw on the more recent turnarounds. So, I shall concentrate on low-frequency movements first, and come back to my interpretation of the turnarounds and the future at the end of my talk.Why have required excess returns – risk premia – on, say, stocks trended down? Many explanations specific to the market for business capital are conceivable. One is that expectations of future cash-flows in the form of dividend payments might have consistently lagged behind ex post realisations, which in the end drive stock prices. [2] For example, the potential for sustained economic growth in excess of historical precedents, the availability of profitable investment projects beyond the frontier that was considered attainable ex ante might explain a fraction of the decline in required stock returns over a certain phase.Why have term premia on bonds trended down? Again, specific factors affecting the market for safe financial investments have been cited. I have mentioned already that the rapid expansion of incomes in countries with high propensities to save meant that a large share of their increased demand for assets was directed to the risk-free financial liabilities of primary sovereign issuers, most prominently the US Treasury. Similarly, trends in the market for homes and for private credit can be given explanations rooted in housing preferences and the evolution of default rates through time. But there is one question which remains, beyond all these explanations. [3] They all are too specific to one market. As we see, declines in returns have been generalised. Estimated premia in the stock market in 2008 lie one third and two thirds below their values at the beginning of the 1980s, in the euro area and the US respectively. In the meantime, term premia on the bond market have lost three fourth of their estimated value at the middle of the 1990s in a seemingly relentless fall spanning the entire period for which we could compute them. The premium for investments in houses has followed a similar trend, despite a sharp reversion, in particular in the US in the most recent period. Finally, the cost of corporate borrowing in excess of a riskless rate [Figure 3], which remunerates credit risk, has also decreased significantly in both economies, although its trend is punctuated by significant oscillations in the opposite direction. Obviously we observe the same movements across the board. Facts common to multiple markets suggest the existence of a common factor, something truly related to the size of the required premium for holding all types of risky assets. If the compensation for bearing risk is compressed in all markets, this must reflect that either the quantity of macroeconomic risk has gone down, or the price at which investors trade that risk has declined, or some combination of these two possibilities. In these two further pictures [Figures 1b and 2b], the quantity of aggregate risk is proxied by the macroeconomic uncertainty introduced by the volatility of real per-capita consumption growth [– as measured by rolling standard deviations of per-capita real consumption growth –] and the level of inflation in the two economies. [4] Unfortunately, the price that markets attach to that quantity – agents’ risk aversion – is not directly observable or easily approximated by observable variables. I shall come back to this point later.Why concentrate on consumption volatility as a proxy of real macroeconomic uncertainty? Because this is the privileged statistic of macroeconomic conditions in consumption-based asset pricing models, the standard tool of financial economics. In these models, it is the marginal utility of consumption and its variance that should help price real payoffs in different states of nature. [5] Why focus on inflation as an indicator of nominal uncertainty? If the level of inflation is correlated with its perceived variability, then the level of inflation should influence people’s views of the degree of uncertainty that surrounds their macroeconomic environments. If the nominal scale of the economy is more firmly secured, financial markets will likely reflect it in lower premia.The drawn-out moderation in real macroeconomic volatilities – the Great Moderation – is a well-known fact. It has been persistent, as the pictures indicate, and broad, spreading beyond inflation and consumption to virtually all sectors and components of income, on a global scale, as many studies have demonstrated. [6] The tight correlation between the risk premia priced in various markets and movements in macroeconomic risk is less known, however. It is certainly of great interest to policymakers. [7] It is a challenging piece of evidence for two reasons. Because causation can run both ways, from macroeconomic volatility – the quantum of non-diversifiable risk – to risk compensation in the financial markets, or from the market determination of the reward for risk – the market price of risk – back to the macroeconomic equilibrium. And because both chains of causation entail a blend of structural and contingent factors: factors that are likely to last and factors that are transient and bound to be reversed. Therefore, in September 2008 a scholar, a forecaster, a policymaker looking back to the financial history of the last quarter of a century for clues about the proximate future evolutions faces two questions. First, what determined the compression of risk in virtually all markets: was it a reduction in aggregate risk, or was it a compression in the price for which markets trade and distribute that risk? Second, whatever the cause, did the compression of risk reflect permanent shifts in fundamental connections, or was it transient? A lot – not least in terms of policy decisions – is conditional on a clear identification of these links, of these directions and their nature. Staring at the statistical association between premia and macroeconomic volatilities it would be tempting to draw a line of causation running from declining macroeconomic risk to falling premia. The decrease in macroeconomic uncertainty associated with the fall in the volatilities of consumption and inflation can arguably be expected to have resulted in a corresponding reduction in the uncertainty on future asset returns, thus leading to lower risk premia across the board. In the case of government bonds, for example, a decrease in macroeconomic volatility reduces the risk of unexpected future changes in interest rates – perhaps policy-induced – and removes one primary source of return uncertainty that investors in bonds have to hedge against in less tranquil times. [8] For corporate bonds and commercial paper, a decrease in the amplitude of business-cycle fluctuations should bring about, ceteris paribus, a lower probability of default, which, once again, can translate into lower credit risk premia. Analogous reasoning holds for stock and housing markets, with the fall in macroeconomic volatility translating into a decrease in the uncertainty about expected future returns, and therefore leading to lower risk premia.However, even if one is prepared to entertain the possibility that the line of causation runs predominantly from macroeconomic conditions – fundamental macroeconomic stability – to asset price determination, the prospects for the evolution of market prices in the near future are vastly conditional on the nature of the macroeconomic moderation. If one believes that the main reason for the observed decline in macroeconomic volatilities – and, indirectly, for low risk compensations and high prices in asset markets – is that policy regimes have become more stable, more predictable and confidence-inspiring, then prospects for market participants and policymakers alike will be brighter. We all know that the institutional roots of the Great Moderation are significant, as studies done at the ECB and elsewhere have shown. [9] We know that policy statutes – disciplining monetary policy and the fiscal authority – have been carefully crafted in many countries to make sure that stable policy conditions are put in place and are there to last. So, if all this is true, one could perhaps confidently extrapolate the moderate macroeconomic volatilities of the past into the future. And, in so doing, one would equally be reassured that the down-trends in risk compensation that we have observed for so long – beyond short-run ups and downs – would not be reversed in a sustained manner. But the same line of causation could be less reassuring from another angle. The same studies that have found an important role for policies in the Great Moderation of the last two decades cannot certainly rule out that “good luck” might have exerted a reinforcing influence. More moderate exogenous shocks might have contributed – more or less accidentally – to smoothing economic fluctuations. In the terms of our picture, this would be equivalent to say that the moderation in some non-policy factor driving activity might have been responsible for the fall in inflation and consumption variability.To the extent that this interpretation has some merit, a less fortunate string of shocks could always bring more ample swings in economic conditions – looking forward – than we have grown accustomed to from past experience. And this could entail repercussions for the valuation of investment risk in various financial markets. In this case a return to historical valuations for risk would imply large negative returns for a possibly extended period of time. It is important to understand that the close co-movements that appear when comparing trends in premia with trends in macro-volatilities are not inconsistent with an alternative, inverse pattern of causation: one predominantly running from financial market prices to the macro-economy. Exogenous changes in financial markets may have caused an original fall in risk premia. Since asset prices provide signals for profitable investment opportunities, affect the wealth of households, and influence the cost of capital to firms and households, a compression of risk premia in the markets for capital and credit may have put the economy on a different expansion path where incomes grow faster and are less uncertain. But, again, independent changes in financial markets can be of a structural or more transient nature. I shall start with structural factors. A major source of structural evolution in financial markets over the last twenty years, one that is difficult to overlook and that is likely to last, comes under the encompassing label of increased financial market participation. Institutional investors, such as pension and mutual funds, hedge funds, and more recently sovereign wealth funds, have been playing an increasingly important role in many asset markets. The informed, active trading of these investors has increased market liquidity and led to a reduction in transactions costs. Deeper and less expensive markets have meant that the typical investor – once holding a poorly diversified portfolio with skewed returns – is now better diversified and thus more risk-tolerant. At the same time, the introduction of non-redundant and previously non-existing assets and liabilities has provided a further encouragement for investors and financial intermediaries to transform and transfer risk. The enhanced availability of these new instruments has increased the accessibility and availability of credit to the private sector. I will return to the toxic side of these developments in a minute. Here, as in many studies, I note that an increase in participation has the potential to decrease the required risk premium on a wide spectrum of assets, because it spreads market risk over a broader population. [10] For a given amount of macroeconomic risk – a given quantum of macro-volatility – increased participation can cut the price of risk. And a lower price of risk that is due to a structural break in market participation rates is more likely to persist. But transient factors in financial markets might have been at work as well. For a given quantum of macro-volatility and a given fundamental price of risk, markets can at times under-appreciate the former and under-price the latter. Risk aversion can fluctuate around a fundamental value which is determined by long-lasting evolutions in financial market infrastructures and financial market participation. And these more contingent fluctuations in risk aversion can be slow to re-absorb. Changes in risk aversion can at times look a lot like “bubbles”. But swings in risk aversion that will eventually revert back to some sort of equilibrium are, in my view, the manifestation of a phenomenon – more general than “bubbles” – which has been rationalised and modelled in various ways. [11] The important point is not so much to understand what causes such fluctuations in risk preferences – whether explosive expectations [12] or habit formation in consumption – but that they are ephemeral and, once they take off, they tend to fall back to ground. Occasional waves of higher risk tolerance in financial markets can expand the supply of external finance for the productive sector and for government. And this can make previously unprofitable investment programs look attractive, which can boost growth. But, unlike more structural shifts in financial market infrastructures, occasional turns in risk tolerance are just that: occasional. Reversion to some sort of steady values for risk appetite can undo established market trends and give rise to a prolonged period of strains in market valuations.Varying risk premia blur the fundamental connection between asset prices and real economic decisions. This has been studied extensively and the evidence that I have provided thus far is, after all, but one variation on a traditional theme in financial economics: the risk premium puzzle.But today risk pricing and macroeconomic performance can make contact in ways that are novel and still little known. Here I would like to draw your attention to the increased participation of financial investors – especially hedge funds and institutional investors – in commodity markets. [13] This trend has accompanied the spectacular boom in commodity prices over the last few years and has complicated the interpretation of the fundamental drivers of prices in those markets in various phases. We can take the oil futures markets as an example. Futures contracts are agreements to buy or sell a specified quantity of a commodity at a future date, at a price agreed upon when entering the contract, the futures price. However, in regulated exchanges [such as NYMEX or ICE] these contracts are traded chiefly for hedging risk on price changes rather than for arranging physical delivery of oil. [14] Traditionally, these markets have been characterised, more frequently than not, by a market constellation of prices known as ‘backwardation’. This indicates a situation in which futures prices are below the current spot price [ see Figure 4]. [15] To understand what this means, note that both producers and consumers of oil are normally interested in hedging the risk of fluctuations in the future spot price of oil – which is unknown today. But, since oil production and supply is concentrated among far fewer participants than total consumption among consumers, suppliers are more likely to factor the risk of future price fluctuations into their economic decisions to a larger extent than any single buyer. This strengthens the incentive for suppliers to hedge against adverse fluctuations in spot prices. Traditionally, the market for oil futures has been a “sellers’ market.” And sellers have been on average happy to pay a premium to market traders willing to buy a futures contract and take upon themselves the risk of future spot price declines. “Backwardation” means that buyers as a whole normally agree to provide this insurance if they can expect to earn a positive premium on top of the expected change in the future price of oil. [16] Assuming that the best predictor of the spot price in the future is the current spot price, the spread between the current spot price and the futures price reflects the remuneration for the risk that buyers as a whole accept to bear. [17] Over the last two decades when backwardation has been the norm, the risk premium paid by hedgers to financial investors has been relatively stable, moving predictably with the spot price of oil [Figure 4]. [18] More recently, since 2005, this relationship between the risk premium and the spot price of oil appears to have changed and risk premia paid by hedgers have been shrinking to become even negative between early 2005 and 2007. [19] This is clear from the evolution over time of the futures price curve [for Brent oil price], on which the ECB oil price projections are based. The curve clearly moved from a downward slope to an upward tilt around the same time and maintained the increasing tilt at least until the middle of 2007 [ Figure 5]. This atypical compression – and inversion – of the risk premia paid in the oil futures market has gone hand in hand with an appreciable change in the structure of these markets, with a growing involvement of non-commercial participants. The change in the composition of the market has been made evident by the emergence of a new net positive speculative position [Figure 6]. It seems as though the market for oil futures, traditionally dominated by hedging sellers, had at times become a “buyers’ market.”How are these developments to be interpreted? What is the direction of influence between fundamental trends in the real economy and the pricing of financial risk? A fundamentals-driven interpretation has it that increasing futures prices indeed signal a fundamental break in spot price expectations: which traditionally had been “mean-reverting” and might have become persistently bullish, reflecting a perceived break in the anticipated imbalances between oil demand and oil production on a global scale. But observers focusing on the change in the balance between short and long positions in the market have pointed to the possibility that futures prices – determined on a market in which buyers are increasingly motivated by a search for financial yield rather than the incentive to hedge – might have been contributing in certain market phases to movements in the spot price. Have financial investors played a stabilising or a destabilizing role at a time of booming commodity prices and heightened uncertainty about their long-term fundamentals? According to a benign view, ‘financial investors’ have expanded liquidity in commodity markets, and have made the market more efficient in processing information, thus improving price discovery at a time of greater uncertainty about fundamentals. New financial actors such as highly leveraged funds and institutional investors may have contributed to lowering spreads and the associated risk premia in commodity futures markets by spreading their own portfolio risk more widely. In this sense, they may even have strengthened the traditional insurance role of futures markets. In addition, financial investors may have helped bring forward price increases that would have occurred nonetheless. This may have provided a signal to both consumers and producers that they needed to start adjusting their consumption and investment plans before the economy hits the physical constraints of oil supply. In this sense, some volatility today might have been the price to pay to avoid even higher volatility in the future.But, according to an opposite interpretation, financial investors operating systematically on the futures market might have reduced the risk and the cost faced by sellers who want to accumulate inventories, or possibly delay production to gain from steep anticipated price trends. In this way they might have exacerbated changes in prices and inventories due to predicted changes in fundamentals. They might have sent noisier and potentially distorted signals to producers and consumers. [20] If this seems to me a reasonable conjecture, I admit, though, that existing evidence does not provide uncontroversial support to the notion that non-commercial investors in futures markets have been systematically playing a significant role in pushing spot prices out of their fundamental equilibrium. Since August 2007, markets have become increasingly discriminating with regard to the risks posed by the real investment projects underlying a wide range of securitised credit. This new attitude is reflected in the large rebounds in risk premia that I have noted in my charts. Spreads on financial institution debt, in particular, have widened in the euro area and in the US reflecting uncertainty over the extent of future credit write-offs, the full recognition of off-balance-sheet commitments, and future earnings capacity. The wide perception in the markets is that financial institutions face difficulties in maintaining earnings due to falling credit quality and declining fee income in a macro-economic environment already taxed by sharp rises in real production costs. As intermediaries tend to economise on capital, assets are being sold and lending conditions have tightened. As I have shown in Figure 3, the correction in the appraisal of risk has thus been broad-based, and spreads on funding costs for corporates have stuck to levels that had not been on market records for a long period of time. My conjecture is that the recent corrections and retrenchments in financial markets bring two lessons and leave much to be learned from future analysis and experience. I start from the two lessons. First, as has often happened in the past, non-fundamental market dynamics have grown out of fundamentals and the feed-back loops that these have created. As I said already, increased financial market participation has set a new secular trend toward a lower price of risk sustained by long-term financial deepening. Financial deepening, in turn, has initially responded to a real demand for a more efficient sharing of risk. More effective risk sharing has meant better mechanisms through which producers and ultimate savers can hedge open positions arising from their real transactions. As a side-effect, this process – generalised to a wide range of markets – has brought sustained capital gains to an expanding number of beneficiaries. This, in turn, has improved incomes and the economic outlook. And the process has been feeding and reinforcing itself. Second lesson: “good health is always a precarious situation that does not presage anything good.” At some point in the maturing process, brighter prospects have meant under-assessment of the macroeconomic risk and under-pricing of the unit quantity of risk. Financial markets have ceased to facilitate the dispersion of the risk that is intrinsic to the underlying economic activities, and they have developed into formidable risk multipliers. The new structured financial products that grew exponentially in the ten years leading up to the recent disorders in financial markets, by pooling and repackaging income streams of different quality, gave the false impression that the benefits of diversification would reduce the risks inherent in the underlying assets. But the leverage embedded in those products meant that end-investors were in fact exposed to a quantum of risk that could outstrip – rather than mitigate – that implied by the underlying pool of assets. Excessive leverage was the mechanism which – at some point – turned an efficient process of risk diffusion into a dangerous spiral of risk amplification and concentration. Third: stable institutions and firm monetary policy frameworks are needed more than ever in times of turbulence: financial stability is no substitute to price stability. The latter is a precondition to the former. As I said, a significant part of the decline in macroeconomic uncertainty is no windfall for modern societies: it is the fair and expected reward for institutional reform. In continental Europe, this reform has been induced largely by the need to converge to sound macroeconomic policies as signalled, in particular, by the best macroeconomic regimes that were available in the Continent. The process has been successful, both historically – comparing performances before and after monetary union [Figure 1b] – and in cross-section. This figure [Figure 7] establishes a comparison between macroeconomic volatilities in the euro area and elsewhere since 1999: a comprehensive cross section of international macroeconomic outcomes. Despite recent shocks, the euro area countries have compressed aggregate risk relative to their past, and have done it beyond the standards that are set by other countries. Stable and transparent monetary institutions have helped the economy before – remember the stock market collapse of the early years of this decade – and will help this time. But – here suggestions for further reflection and analysis start – to what extent have stable macroeconomic frameworks genuinely squeezed risks out of the system? And to what extent have they encouraged over-confidence and complacency? We saw that complacency played a role in the under-pricing of risk in a certain market phase. But the remaining question is whether the relaxation in financial prudence could have been triggered by false expectations of a perennially smooth economic environment that policymakers could have avoided in words and deeds.Developments in financial markets have largely coincided with pressures on the real costs of commodities which – in terms of intensity and persistence – have been largely unprecedented. As I tried to argue, it is not clear whether the inversion of the oil futures curve – with futures prices occasionally increasing above spot prices – should be taken to signal a permanent inversion of spot price expectations, presaging a long period of further appreciations in the real price of energy. Or, simply, it should be understood as yet another reflection of a varying risk premium signalling a wedge between asset prices and fundamentals. Today more than ever before, efforts – by scholars and central banks alike – to connect market returns and risk pricing to a fuller range of macroeconomic phenomena have high potential pay-offs. The challenge, in the end, is to build models that can match asset pricing facts, while at the same time maintaining – if not improving on – the existing business cycle models’ ability to account for quantity fluctuations. This is no small challenge. These models would need to match the price of risk and the relative volatilities of consumption, output and investment. By doing so, they would offer instruments for evaluating the predictability of asset returns – and their cross-section – based on assumptions about the evolution of the real economy. They would allow interpreting the drawn-out declines in risk appreciation that have spanned more than two decades. Most importantly, they would be suitable tools to measure the exact proportion in which the more recent changes in risk premia reflect stable breaks in the reward for risk, or are products of transient market whims. They would help disentangle the effects on commodity prices of fundamental trends in oil demand – which are likely to be sustained and thus most relevant for policy – from the swinging influences of new financial strategies.Ideally, these new models would offer ways to simulate and stress-test situations of unquantifiable – Knightian – uncertainly, where past correlations collapse and perverse expectations determine new dynamics. But, as I speak, we still have a lot of work to elucidate these interactions. Financial participants and policymakers have to rely on robust behavioural rules that can minimise the chance that business strategies and policy decisions might be based on a misguided model or an over-optimistic representation of economic reality. I will start with two fundamental principles that should govern the business model of financial operators and protect them from the hazards of excessive risk taking. I will then turn to monetary policy. First, financial participation and financial sophistication find their limit in complexity. The recent experience has taught us that increasing complexity of financial instruments can undermine the benefits of financial innovation. Savers become more risk averse – sometimes through abrupt retractions from market trading – if faced with increasing difficulties in evaluating the risk to which they are exposed. The recent market strains started to pose challenges to the macro-economy at large when investors sought clarity about the quality of specific assets supporting investment securities, and shed those whose risk they could not easily assess. And a primary source of losses for financial institutions came from the concentrated exposures that were implicit in the warehousing, structuring and trading of complex credit derivatives. Complexity prevented them from fully appreciating the possibility that the losses in the underlying assets could – in distressed market conditions – reach levels which would impair the value of the super-senior tranches that they had retained in their balance sheets. Second, the management and the valuation of risk at the level of business units have become critical activities. As I said before, expanded financial participation can cut the share of risk that each participant shoulders at each point in time. But the dark side of this phenomenon is that it also provides an encouragement for financial services organisations to expand the overall amount of risk that is traded. And it weakens market participants’ anti-bodies against excessive individual exposure and risk taking. There is evidence that the financial firms that have performed better since the turmoil began a year ago are those in which management had established rigorous internal processes and discipline in the valuation of risk. Those are firms that had not exclusively relied on external views of credit risk – from rating agencies or pricing services – but had also developed in-house expertise to conduct independent assessments of the most critical positions. They had established stronger internal checks over individual business lines to control activities that had the potential to lead to significant balance sheet growth or unexpected reductions in capital. The sophistication of their risk measurement processes had kept pace with increasing risk taking. The quantitative methodologies employed were varied – notional limits to risk assumption, value-at-risk indicators, stress tests and forward-looking scenario analysis – and flexible, so that management could quickly vary assumptions about the scale of shocks or the degree of market volatility and the pattern of asset correlations in difficult market conditions. These firms had resisted the tendency – which becomes widespread in times when risks seem well-distributed and traders well-diversified – to a dilution of the incentive to exercise prudence. Controlling the primary sources of excessive risk taking is within the control of major financial participants. It is critical that internal processes and practices be deployed that can curb the tendency to expand business aggressively in times of greater propensity to risk taking, to a point beyond the capacity of the relevant control infrastructures. Supervisory oversight can and will support efforts in this direction. Among other supporting measures, strengthened prudential oversight of capital, liquidity and risk management is of the essence to ensure an appropriate capital treatment and disclosure of on and off-balance exposures and that liquidity buffers correspond to the liquidity risks incurred. Supervisors and regulators will communicate early to firms’ boards their risk management concerns and the need to take responsive action. The swinging and unpredictable interactions between the markets and real economic decisions are unlikely to have long-lasting and severe consequences for the macro-economy as long as monetary policy maintains a clear sense of direction. I already highlighted the role that new monetary policy frameworks have played in the transition to a new macroeconomic regime, in which incomes, consumption and other measures of economic welfare follow a steadier course. As I tried to argue, the interpretation of the link between the reduction in macroeconomic uncertainty – the Great Moderation – and the pricing of that uncertainty in the markets poses many unresolved issues. But very few observers and scholars would object that central banks’ commitment to keeping inflation low and stable, their improved communication about their price stability objectives and their acting on those objectives by the force of deeds, has importantly contributed to the reduction in macroeconomic risk that we find in the data. They would also agree that if aggregate – un-diversifiable – risk diminishes, this ought to be reflected in the premia that financial markets pay for risk taking. That fraction of reduced risk compensations is a stable acquisition of modern economies. The complement to that fraction – what is due to excessive financial sophistication, abnormal risk tolerance and shortcomings in risk management; and what is due to the persistence of international imbalances and the steady appreciation of commodities – will pass. At this stage, let me make three remarks. First, we have exercised an ongoing warning function, whenever the amount and the price of risk traded in financial markets had departed from the trends that appeared justified by lasting changes in macroeconomic fundamentals. Our communication on the financial imbalances that were being created in the over-confident market conditions that prevailed until the summer of 2007 has been vindicated ex post. Starting from last summer, financial markets have finally initiated a process of re-pricing of risk to more appropriate levels, and to pay more attention to the quality of the assets they invest in, although this process has been significantly less orderly than we would have hoped. Since risk premia across a wide spectrum of assets had fallen to excessively low levels, their return to more appropriate values—and the accompanying process of financial de-leveraging—is to be regarded as a necessary development. Under this respect, the most appropriate policy response is therefore to allow such process to take place in an as orderly way as possible, playing a supporting role whenever medium-term downside risk to price stability might emerge along the way. Second, we have been crystal-clear since the beginning of the financial turbulence that we would make a strict separation between the monetary policy stance – which is designed exclusively to deliver price stability in the medium term in an exceptionally difficult period – and the implementation of this monetary policy through the Eurosystem credit operations. These operations were designed with a view to maintaining the short-term rates close to our policy rates within an environment of turbulent money markets. This concept has been well understood by market participants and has preserved the integrity and the credibility of our monetary policy. It has also facilitated our fundamental goal to preserve a firm anchoring of inflation expectations in line with our definition of price stability.Third, let me concentrate on inflation expectations in an environment of sustained supply-side shocks. We need to consider that the sequence of shocks to commodity prices that we have faced in the past five years confronts us with a difficult identification problem. Supply-side shocks that hit in one direction for such a prolonged period of time can become engrained in inflation expectations. If – and when – this happens, then these shocks change their nature. If they de-stabilise expectations, they become more similar to demand shocks. A demand shock calls for a shorter policy horizon.Our policy horizon is the medium term, and the medium term should be taken to be at least as long as the average transmission lag for policy actions. While facing rises in commodity prices, the policy horizon could theoretically be more extended. But, the circumstances that I just described are not typical and the risk that a repeated sequence of supply-side shocks might turn into a demand disturbance with long-lasting implications for price stability has made our horizon shorter. It has made it closer to the average transmission lag. As I pointed out in my opening remarks, these are testing times. The financial turbulence that started last summer, and the increases in commodity prices of the last few years, conjured to create a very challenging environment, in which central banks have to simultaneously face off the fragilities of the financial fabric and the inflationary pressures originating from global commodity markets. It is precisely during such difficult times that the benefits of a solid monetary framework oriented to price stability become apparent. Our framework—with a strong mandate for price stability, a focus on a firm anchoring of inflation expectations, and a crucial role assigned to a monetary aggregates—is, under this respect, ideally suited to the challenges we are currently facing, as it encodes the lessons of the central banks which, during the 1970s, successfully ‘opted out’ of the Great Inflation. This framework, coupled with our absolute resolve to avoid repeating the mistakes of the 1970s, will guarantee price stability, thus contributing to economic growth and job creation in the euro area. Thank you for your attention. Figure 1: Euro area, Risk premia and Macroeconomic Risk  Figure 2: US, Risk premia and Macroeconomic Risk  Figure 3: Credit spreads in the euro area and US  Figure 4: Futures spreads on NYMEX & oil spot price (WTI)  Figure 5: Futures curve for Brent oil price  Figure 6: Number of positions by non-commercial participants (NYMEX) & WTI oil price  Figure 7: Macroeconomic volatility in the euro area and elsewhere since January 1999 Alquist, R. and L. Kilian (2008), “What do we learn from the price of crude oil futures?’, unpublished paper, University of Michigan. Benati, L. and P. Surico (2008), ‘VAR Analysis and the Great Moderation’, forthcoming in American Economic Review.Campbell, J. and J. Cochrane (1999), ‘By Force of Habit: A Consumption-based Explanation of Aggregate Stock-Market Behaviour’, Journal of Political Economy 107: 205-251.Campbell, J. and R. Shiller (2003), ‘Valuation Ratios and Long-run Stock Market Outlook: An Update’, in Advances in Behavioural Finance, Volume II, edited by N. Barberis and R. Thaler, Russel Sage Foundation, New York, NY.Davis, M., A. Lehnert and R. Martin (2007), ‘The Rent-Price Ratio for the Aggregate Stock of Owner-Occupied Housing’, mimeo, Federal Reserve Board of Governors.Domanski, D. and A. Heath (2007), ‘Financial Investors and Commodity Markets’, BIS Quarterly Review (March).Gorton, G. and K. G. Rouwenhorst (2004), ‘Facts and Fantasies about Commodity Prices’, NBER Working Paper No. 10595. Jagannathan, R., E.R. McGrattan, and A. Scherbina (2000), ‘The Declining U.S. Equity Premium’, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 24(4), Fall 2000: 3-19.Kim, D. and A. Orphanides (2005), ‘Term structure estimation with survey data on interest rate forecasts’, FED Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2005-48.Kim, D. and J. Wright (2005), ‘An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term-structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates’, FED Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2005-33. Lettau, M., S.C. Ludvigson, and J.A. Wachter (2008), ‘The Declining Equity Premium: What Role Does Macroeconomic Risk Play?’, Review of Financial Studies 21(4): 1653-1687. Pagano, P. and M. Pisani (2006), ‘Risk-adjusted forecasts of oil prices’, Temi di discussione no. 585, Bank of Italy.Plosser, C. I. (2007), ‘What Can We Expect from the Yield Curve?’, speech given by Charles I. Plosser, President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia to the New Jersey Bankers Annual Convention, Palm Beach, Florida, March 23, 2007Rudebusch, G., E. Swanson and T. Wu (2006), ‘The Bond Yield Conundrum from a Macro-Finance Perspective’ Monetary and Economic Studies, Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, vol. 24(S1), pages 83-109, December.Sharpe, S. (1999), ‘Stock prices, Expected Returns and Inflation’, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System FEDS Paper, 99-02.Stock, J. and M. Watson (2002), ‘Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?’, in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2002, Cambridge, Mass., The MIT Press. [1] Defining the stream of cash-flows earned by the asset by {dt}t=0...∞, the market price at time t of an asset with an extremely long maturity, pt, satisfies the following identity: pt = ∑j=1... ∞ (1+ rt + πt)-j Et dt+j, where Et is the expectations operator at time t. The financial factor that is used to discount the expected stream of payouts, rt + πt, has two components: a risk-free rate, rt, which could be earned on a competing asset with certain returns, and an excess rate of return, πt, which remunerates the investor for the added risk that she is taking on. I shall refer to the latter factor, interchangeably, as excess return or risk premium. [2] Referring to the formula in the previous footnote, and interpreting {dt}t=0...∞ as the actual (ex post) stream of dividend payments, systematic underprediction of the dividend stream looking forward from any given vantage point t can result in an underestimation of the return that can be expected, at t, from holding the stock at the current price pt because the market price grows at the growth rate of the actual dividend payments. [3] In fact there are more problems. First, explaining low equity risk premia with systematic under-prediction of income streams has limited explanatory power. If anything, the scant evidence available on earnings expectations point in the opposite direction. Sharpe (1999), for example, finds that in the period between 1994 and the end of the century forecasts of two-year nominal earnings growth were high and stable (between 10% and 15%), even though realised two-year earnings growth were declining. It should also be noted that higher growth in realised payoffs, per se, is not sufficient to account for price movements over the entire sample, because dividend-to-price and earning-to-price ratios have themselves trended down. The secular fall in the dividend-to-price and earnings-to-price ratios is actually the fact that needs to be explained in the first place. See, among many others, Jagannathan, McGrattan and Scherbina (2000). Second, concerning low term premia, foreign official purchases of US bonds – by the monetary authorities of countries which follow a stable exchange rate policy vis-à-vis the US dollar – was found to have played little or no role as a factor contributing to low long-term interest rates in a study of the interest rate conundrum. See Rudebusch, Swanson and Wu (2006). [4] The level of inflation is found to be correlated with its variability, which in turn should influence people’s perceptions of the degree of uncertainty that surrounds their macroeconomic environments. [5] In many standard asset-pricing models with complete markets, the risk premium, or excess return, paid by an asset with uncertain payoffs is proportional to the volatility of consumption, with a risk aversion parameter as the constant of proportionality. In these models, aggregate consumption volatility stands for the quantity of risk, while the parameter scaling agents’ risk aversion stands for the price of risk. A crucial subsidiary assumption behind this logic is that all wealth – including human capital – is tradable, so that the aggregate return can be interpreted as the gross return to an asset that represents a claim to aggregate consumption. [6] Stock and Watson (2002), among others, show that the decline in volatility appears in a large number of macroeconomic time series: employment growth, consumption growth, inflation and sectoral output growth, as well as in GDP growth. The decline is not confined to the US economy, but is well visible in a vast array of economies, both industrialised and developing, with few exceptions. [7] A correlation between different indicators of equity valuations and consumption volatility for a set of eleven industrialised countries has been noted before. See, for example, Lettau, Ludvigson and Wachter (2008). But Figures 1 and 2 document that evidence of this type of correlation is more pervasive than studied in their paper. [8] A detailed discussion along these lines of the impact of a fall in the volatility of inflation and output growth on the bond term premium can be found, e.g., in Plosser (2007).[9] Benati and Surico (2008) finds that the role of stabilising monetary policy can go some way toward explaining the Great Moderation. [10] The emergence and growth of new financial intermediaries can have further and deeper causes. For example, the more recent, accelerated integration of emerging markets into the global economy may have led to an increase in global savings and, as a result, to a growing demand for financial services and new financial operators. Also, the achievements of peak-savings years by the baby-boom generation might have expanded the pool of resources that need to be intermediated by specialised pension funds. In fact, the abundance of global savings – whether induced by the globalisation of economic processes or by the aging of a large share of the world population – is indeed one of the explanations advanced for the exceptionally low bond yields recently observed in the U.S. and, to a lesser extent, also in the Euro area.[11] For example, models in which investors’ preferences display habit formation – the argument of utility is not the absolute level of consumption but the level of consumption relative to some “normal” level – can generate time-varying risk tolerance. Agents are more risk averse when current consumption is around the level that they consider “normal” based on their past income/consumption history. In these circumstances – which indeed should apply in normal times – only a small fraction of consumption is available as a surplus to generate utility, and even small shocks to consumption can have a large effect on this surplus. Therefore, investors are extremely risk averse. A positive shock to income can cause actual consumption to exceed its perceived “normal” by a wide margin and for a prolonged period of time. This increases agents’ risk appetite because now the consumption surplus is larger. Campbell and Cochrane (1999) prove that the (equity) risk premium can fluctuate due to this mechanism. [12] Within the cash-flow-discount model for asset pricing that is expounded in footnote 2, seemingly explosive price dynamics can be generated by a sequence of negative innovations to the risk premium, πt. [13] See, for example, Domanski and Heath (2007). [14] Although physical delivery of oil may occur, this in reality occurs rather rarely. Contracts are instead liquidated before expiration usually leading to exchange of cash among market participants. So, for example, while an airline normally buys jet fuel through its usual physical supplier, it can purchase a futures contract to hedge possible price increase over the subsequent months. If the price actually rises, the gain from liquidating the futures contract towards expiration will offset the loss from the greater cost of fuel. [15] The opposite situation in which the term structure of futures prices is upward sloping is known in traders’ jargon as “contango”, and has traditionally occurred less frequently than “backwardation”.[16] Some financial participants may be enticed to buy or sell futures contracts by different views on the future oil price than the market. But on average financial participants are net buyers and assuming that they are on average no better than sellers in predicting the future spot price, they will need a discount over the price expected at the expiration of the futures contract to be motivated to purchase it. [17] This risk premium is the mirror image of what sellers as a group are willing to give up for the benefits of holding physical inventories of oil, which have the important role of ensuring the continuation of production and sale in the face of potential disruption in the oil supply chain. In jargon inventories provide a “convenience yield”, which in the oil market can be quite sizeable. The convenience yield is normally inversely related to the deviation of inventories from their desired size. [18] This pattern presumably reflected the belief of market participants in a stable long-run price of oil to which the spot price was expected to revert eventually. [19] Here we focus on a measure of the risk premium (or roll return) earned by buyers of futures based on the assumption that the best predictor of the future spot oil price is today spot price. This allows an immediate interpretation of the observed spreads over the spot price at which futures contracts are traded. And, most importantly, over longer samples it is found to be the most accurate predictor (Alquist and Kilian, 2008). However, other measures of the risk premium in oil futures are also conceivable and used in practise (in particular in central banks’ forecasts). For example, Pagano and Pisani (2006) regress the ex-post realised risk premium on a constant and the degree of variable capacity utilisation in US manufacturing (a proxy for the state of the business cycle), taking the fitted value as their measure of risk premium. [20] The accumulation of inventories may have sustained increasing spot prices from 2003 till the middle of 2007. Yet the spot price has continued to rise since. The fall in inventories may of course simply be due to tighter fundamentals. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen extend period ampl financi market liquid except low reward risk loss valu import class real asset impart sharp deterior investor appetit rise commod price erod consum purchas power real incom prospect reinforc household risk avers long phase heighten risk toler economi come end extent recent turn market correct past excess welcom pain process anticip ask market particip prepar past intervent time declin compens risk recent turmoil part revers recent develop start quarter centuri ago tandem probabl reflect seem persist declin macroeconom uncertainti extent moder macroeconom fluctuat aggreg risk would confirm perman acquisit modern economi reason believ trend lower risk valuat beyond need correct recent excess could end reassert talk reflect upon evid lie heart mechan risk valuat make contact real econom decis ultim aim reflect find hint fundament valu risk theori sympathi histor break risk valuat market realis break larg mirror structur develop balanc save invest global scale china phenomen growth domest manufactur capac incom product match equiproport growth domest spend capac chines save grew ahead even dramat pace domest invest expand time aftermath east asian crisi brought invest strike mani economi border asian pacif taught author countri bigger liquid buffer denomin safe western currenc need defend volatil behaviour foreign privat investor final intern financi market call upon recycl massiv hardcurr balanc accumul commod export countri made save wealth abund ex ant relat invest incom led downsid adjust reward investor claim receiv compens financ develop time domin financi landscap break evolut market reward risk focus date long rise asian economi increas commod price search fundament connect financi risk macroeconom perform develop countri focus remark direct link great moder determin quantum risk trade market price risk determin financi market contribut part determin fluctuat structur link thus like persist beyond shortterm volatil transient complet understand relat would bring invalu insight polici consider one thing centrepiec dynam macroeconom equat save invest asset price risk remuner embodi mechan equat therefor sustain movement risk premia size seen past quarter centuri bound import implic alloc consumpt invest across time state natur determin aggreg demand point time econom state also mention new extent unknown form interact financi market real economi one possibl mani observ contempl price determin market key factor product energi commod might increas influenc forc trade strategi motiv financi drive toward portfolio diversif besid desir secur access physic deliveri way market might price financi risk might make interpret price difficult unfortun conclus state knowledg advanc enough draw definit conclus natur direct influenc risk price macroeconomi nevertheless submit conjectur lay basic behaviour principl could help policymak minimis major loss amid uncertainti surround current econom junctur also appeal mani distinguish scholar sit front today concentr mind elucid relat univoc way assess whether asset valu high low relat econom norm popular commentari often focus price indic deviat longterm averag cours index level vari general price inflat growth real economi chang size public trade asset relat economi customari analyst scale asset price various way summari statist valuat abstract scale problem asset risk premium rate excess return investor expect earn long run invest current price asset generat uncertain payoff investor ask compens risk would bear chose hold competit secur compar predict return risk premium repres reward given stream expect cash flow higher risk premium today signal diminish willing hold riski asset equival higher requir return higher return generat futur price appreci lower current price increas premium today associ capit loss form drop current price asset convers low premium signal high current price relat expect incom stream discount riskfre rate risk premium measur attract riski invest relat riskfre altern indirect measur market appetit invest risk figur figur document basic fact constitut subject consider risk macroeconomi focus estim risk premia paid four import asset class equiti hous govern bond corpor credit secur span four market extern financ critic function modern economi market capit instal busi residenti establish market credit govern corpor borrow use us euro area observ whenev avail intern evid broad confirm pictur concentr last quarter centuri movement shall reflect upon evid see pictur two thing first emphasis trend rather wave see risk premia repres spectrum asset declin less consist sinc middl anoth way say market price asset tend appreci relat stream expect payoff discount riskfre rate second look higherfrequ movement around trend notic turnaround financi seri toward end period particular equiti credit financ becom cost firm obtain risk premia requir hold stock credit secur recent bounc back low achiev earlier upsw equiti risk premium came first violent revers credit risk premia even recent histori understand trend comov import precondit infer need draw recent turnaround shall concentr lowfrequ movement first come back interpret turnaround futur end talk requir excess return risk premia say stock trend mani explan specif market busi capit conceiv one expect futur cashflow form dividend payment might consist lag behind ex post realis end drive stock price exampl potenti sustain econom growth excess histor preced avail profit invest project beyond frontier consid attain ex ant might explain fraction declin requir stock return certain phase term premia bond trend specif factor affect market safe financi invest cite mention alreadi rapid expans incom countri high propens save meant larg share increas demand asset direct riskfre financi liabil primari sovereign issuer promin us treasuri similar trend market home privat credit given explan root hous prefer evolut default rate time one question remain beyond explan specif one market see declin return generalis estim premia stock market lie one third two third valu begin euro area us respect meantim term premia bond market lost three fourth estim valu middl seem relentless fall span entir period could comput premium invest hous follow similar trend despit sharp revers particular us recent period final cost corpor borrow excess riskless rate figur remuner credit risk also decreas signific economi although trend punctuat signific oscil opposit direct obvious observ movement across board fact common multipl market suggest exist common factor someth truli relat size requir premium hold type riski asset compens bear risk compress market must reflect either quantiti macroeconom risk gone price investor trade risk declin combin two possibl two pictur figur b b quantiti aggreg risk proxi macroeconom uncertainti introduc volatil real percapita consumpt growth measur roll standard deviat percapita real consumpt growth level inflat two economi unfortun price market attach quantiti agent risk avers direct observ easili approxim observ variabl shall come back point later concentr consumpt volatil proxi real macroeconom uncertainti privileg statist macroeconom condit consumptionbas asset price model standard tool financi econom model margin util consumpt varianc help price real payoff differ state natur focus inflat indic nomin uncertainti level inflat correl perceiv variabl level inflat influenc peopl view degre uncertainti surround macroeconom environ nomin scale economi firm secur financi market like reflect lower premia drawnout moder real macroeconom volatil great moder wellknown fact persist pictur indic broad spread beyond inflat consumpt virtual sector compon incom global scale mani studi demonstr tight correl risk premia price various market movement macroeconom risk less known howev certain great interest policymak challeng piec evid two reason causat run way macroeconom volatil quantum nondiversifi risk risk compens financi market market determin reward risk market price risk back macroeconom equilibrium chain causat entail blend structur conting factor factor like last factor transient bound revers therefor septemb scholar forecast policymak look back financi histori last quarter centuri clue proxim futur evolut face two question first determin compress risk virtual market reduct aggreg risk compress price market trade distribut risk second whatev caus compress risk reflect perman shift fundament connect transient lot least term polici decis condit clear identif link direct natur stare statist associ premia macroeconom volatil would tempt draw line causat run declin macroeconom risk fall premia decreas macroeconom uncertainti associ fall volatil consumpt inflat arguabl expect result correspond reduct uncertainti futur asset return thus lead lower risk premia across board case govern bond exampl decreas macroeconom volatil reduc risk unexpect futur chang interest rate perhap policyinduc remov one primari sourc return uncertainti investor bond hedg less tranquil time corpor bond commerci paper decreas amplitud businesscycl fluctuat bring ceteri paribus lower probabl default translat lower credit risk premia analog reason hold stock hous market fall macroeconom volatil translat decreas uncertainti expect futur return therefor lead lower risk premia howev even one prepar entertain possibl line causat run predomin macroeconom condit fundament macroeconom stabil asset price determin prospect evolut market price near futur vast condit natur macroeconom moder one believ main reason observ declin macroeconom volatil indirect low risk compens high price asset market polici regim becom stabl predict confidenceinspir prospect market particip policymak alik brighter know institut root great moder signific studi done ecb elsewher shown know polici statut disciplin monetari polici fiscal author care craft mani countri make sure stabl polici condit put place last true one could perhap confid extrapol moder macroeconom volatil past futur one would equal reassur downtrend risk compens observ long beyond shortrun up down would revers sustain manner line causat could less reassur anoth angl studi found import role polici great moder last two decad cannot certain rule good luck might exert reinforc influenc moder exogen shock might contribut less accident smooth econom fluctuat term pictur would equival say moder nonpolici factor drive activ might respons fall inflat consumpt variabl extent interpret merit less fortun string shock could alway bring ampl swing econom condit look forward grown accustom past experi could entail repercuss valuat invest risk various financi market case return histor valuat risk would impli larg negat return possibl extend period time import understand close comov appear compar trend premia trend macrovolatil inconsist altern invers pattern causat one predomin run financi market price macroeconomi exogen chang financi market may caus origin fall risk premia sinc asset price provid signal profit invest opportun affect wealth household influenc cost capit firm household compress risk premia market capit credit may put economi differ expans path incom grow faster less uncertain independ chang financi market structur transient natur shall start structur factor major sourc structur evolut financi market last twenti year one difficult overlook like last come encompass label increas financi market particip institut investor pension mutual fund hedg fund recent sovereign wealth fund play increas import role mani asset market inform activ trade investor increas market liquid led reduct transact cost deeper less expens market meant typic investor hold poor diversifi portfolio skew return better diversifi thus risktoler time introduct nonredund previous nonexist asset liabil provid encourag investor financi intermediari transform transfer risk enhanc avail new instrument increas access avail credit privat sector return toxic side develop minut mani studi note increas particip potenti decreas requir risk premium wide spectrum asset spread market risk broader popul given amount macroeconom risk given quantum macrovolatil increas particip cut price risk lower price risk due structur break market particip rate like persist transient factor financi market might work well given quantum macrovolatil given fundament price risk market time underappreci former underpric latter risk avers fluctuat around fundament valu determin longlast evolut financi market infrastructur financi market particip conting fluctuat risk avers slow reabsorb chang risk avers time look lot like bubbl swing risk avers eventu revert back sort equilibrium view manifest phenomenon general bubbl rationalis model various way import point much understand caus fluctuat risk prefer whether explos expect habit format consumpt ephemer take tend fall back ground occasion wave higher risk toler financi market expand suppli extern financ product sector govern make previous unprofit invest program look attract boost growth unlik structur shift financi market infrastructur occasion turn risk toler occasion revers sort steadi valu risk appetit undo establish market trend give rise prolong period strain market valuat vari risk premia blur fundament connect asset price real econom decis studi extens evid provid thus far one variat tradit theme financi econom risk premium puzzl today risk price macroeconom perform make contact way novel still littl known would like draw attent increas particip financi investor especi hedg fund institut investor commod market trend accompani spectacular boom commod price last year complic interpret fundament driver price market various phase take oil futur market exampl futur contract agreement buy sell specifi quantiti commod futur date price agre upon enter contract futur price howev regul exchang nymex ice contract trade chiefli hedg risk price chang rather arrang physic deliveri oil tradit market characteris frequent market constel price known backward indic situat futur price current spot price see figur understand mean note produc consum oil normal interest hedg risk fluctuat futur spot price oil unknown today sinc oil product suppli concentr among far fewer particip total consumpt among consum supplier like factor risk futur price fluctuat econom decis larger extent singl buyer strengthen incent supplier hedg advers fluctuat spot price tradit market oil futur seller market seller averag happi pay premium market trader will buy futur contract take upon risk futur spot price declin backward mean buyer whole normal agre provid insur expect earn posit premium top expect chang futur price oil assum best predictor spot price futur current spot price spread current spot price futur price reflect remuner risk buyer whole accept bear last two decad backward norm risk premium paid hedger financi investor relat stabl move predict spot price oil figur recent sinc relationship risk premium spot price oil appear chang risk premia paid hedger shrink becom even negat earli clear evolut time futur price curv brent oil price ecb oil price project base curv clear move downward slope upward tilt around time maintain increas tilt least middl figur atyp compress invers risk premia paid oil futur market gone hand hand appreci chang structur market grow involv noncommerci particip chang composit market made evid emerg new net posit specul posit figur seem though market oil futur tradit domin hedg seller time becom buyer market develop interpret direct influenc fundament trend real economi price financi risk fundamentalsdriven interpret increas futur price inde signal fundament break spot price expect tradit meanrevert might becom persist bullish reflect perceiv break anticip imbal oil demand oil product global scale observ focus chang balanc short long posit market point possibl futur price determin market buyer increas motiv search financi yield rather incent hedg might contribut certain market phase movement spot price financi investor play stabilis destabil role time boom commod price heighten uncertainti longterm fundament accord benign view financi investor expand liquid commod market made market effici process inform thus improv price discoveri time greater uncertainti fundament new financi actor high leverag fund institut investor may contribut lower spread associ risk premia commod futur market spread portfolio risk wide sens may even strengthen tradit insur role futur market addit financi investor may help bring forward price increas would occur nonetheless may provid signal consum produc need start adjust consumpt invest plan economi hit physic constraint oil suppli sens volatil today might price pay avoid even higher volatil futur accord opposit interpret financi investor oper systemat futur market might reduc risk cost face seller want accumul inventori possibl delay product gain steep anticip price trend way might exacerb chang price inventori due predict chang fundament might sent noisier potenti distort signal produc consum seem reason conjectur admit though exist evid provid uncontroversi support notion noncommerci investor futur market systemat play signific role push spot price fundament equilibrium sinc august market becom increas discrimin regard risk pose real invest project under wide rang securitis credit new attitud reflect larg rebound risk premia note chart spread financi institut debt particular widen euro area us reflect uncertainti extent futur credit writeoff full recognit offbalancesheet commit futur earn capac wide percept market financi institut face difficulti maintain earn due fall credit qualiti declin fee incom macroeconom environ alreadi tax sharp rise real product cost intermediari tend economis capit asset sold lend condit tighten shown figur correct apprais risk thus broadbas spread fund cost corpor stuck level market record long period time conjectur recent correct retrench financi market bring two lesson leav much learn futur analysi experi start two lesson first often happen past nonfundament market dynam grown fundament feedback loop creat said alreadi increas financi market particip set new secular trend toward lower price risk sustain longterm financi deepen financi deepen turn initi respond real demand effici share risk effect risk share meant better mechan produc ultim saver hedg open posit aris real transact sideeffect process generalis wide rang market brought sustain capit gain expand number beneficiari turn improv incom econom outlook process feed reinforc second lesson good health alway precari situat presag anyth good point matur process brighter prospect meant underassess macroeconom risk underpr unit quantiti risk financi market ceas facilit dispers risk intrins under econom activ develop formid risk multipli new structur financi product grew exponenti ten year lead recent disord financi market pool repackag incom stream differ qualiti gave fals impress benefit diversif would reduc risk inher under asset leverag embed product meant endinvestor fact expos quantum risk could outstrip rather mitig impli under pool asset excess leverag mechan point turn effici process risk diffus danger spiral risk amplif concentr third stabl institut firm monetari polici framework need ever time turbul financi stabil substitut price stabil latter precondit former said signific part declin macroeconom uncertainti windfal modern societi fair expect reward institut reform continent europ reform induc larg need converg sound macroeconom polici signal particular best macroeconom regim avail contin process success histor compar perform monetari union figur b crosssect figur figur establish comparison macroeconom volatil euro area elsewher sinc comprehens cross section intern macroeconom outcom despit recent shock euro area countri compress aggreg risk relat past done beyond standard set countri stabl transpar monetari institut help economi rememb stock market collaps earli year decad help time suggest reflect analysi start extent stabl macroeconom framework genuin squeez risk system extent encourag overconfid complac saw complac play role underpr risk certain market phase remain question whether relax financi prudenc could trigger fals expect perenni smooth econom environ policymak could avoid word deed develop financi market larg coincid pressur real cost commod term intens persist larg unpreced tri argu clear whether invers oil futur curv futur price occasion increas spot price taken signal perman invers spot price expect presag long period appreci real price energi simpli understood yet anoth reflect vari risk premium signal wedg asset price fundament today ever effort scholar central bank alik connect market return risk price fuller rang macroeconom phenomena high potenti payoff challeng end build model match asset price fact time maintain improv exist busi cycl model abil account quantiti fluctuat small challeng model would need match price risk relat volatil consumpt output invest would offer instrument evalu predict asset return crosssect base assumpt evolut real economi would allow interpret drawnout declin risk appreci span two decad import would suitabl tool measur exact proport recent chang risk premia reflect stabl break reward risk product transient market whim would help disentangl effect commod price fundament trend oil demand like sustain thus relev polici swing influenc new financi strategi ideal new model would offer way simul stresstest situat unquantifi knightian uncertain past correl collaps pervers expect determin new dynam speak still lot work elucid interact financi particip policymak reli robust behaviour rule minimis chanc busi strategi polici decis might base misguid model overoptimist represent econom realiti start two fundament principl govern busi model financi oper protect hazard excess risk take turn monetari polici first financi particip financi sophist find limit complex recent experi taught us increas complex financi instrument undermin benefit financi innov saver becom risk avers sometim abrupt retract market trade face increas difficulti evalu risk expos recent market strain start pose challeng macroeconomi larg investor sought clariti qualiti specif asset support invest secur shed whose risk could easili assess primari sourc loss financi institut came concentr exposur implicit wareh structur trade complex credit deriv complex prevent fulli appreci possibl loss under asset could distress market condit reach level would impair valu supersenior tranch retain balanc sheet second manag valuat risk level busi unit becom critic activ said expand financi particip cut share risk particip shoulder point time dark side phenomenon also provid encourag financi servic organis expand overal amount risk trade weaken market particip antibodi excess individu exposur risk take evid financi firm perform better sinc turmoil began year ago manag establish rigor intern process disciplin valuat risk firm exclus reli extern view credit risk rate agenc price servic also develop inhous expertis conduct independ assess critic posit establish stronger intern check individu busi line control activ potenti lead signific balanc sheet growth unexpect reduct capit sophist risk measur process kept pace increas risk take quantit methodolog employ vari notion limit risk assumpt valueatrisk indic stress test forwardlook scenario analysi flexibl manag could quick vari assumpt scale shock degre market volatil pattern asset correl difficult market condit firm resist tendenc becom widespread time risk seem welldistribut trader welldiversifi dilut incent exercis prudenc control primari sourc excess risk take within control major financi particip critic intern process practic deploy curb tendenc expand busi aggress time greater propens risk take point beyond capac relev control infrastructur supervisori oversight support effort direct among support measur strengthen prudenti oversight capit liquid risk manag essenc ensur appropri capit treatment disclosur offbal exposur liquid buffer correspond liquid risk incur supervisor regul communic earli firm board risk manag concern need take respons action swing unpredict interact market real econom decis unlik longlast sever consequ macroeconomi long monetari polici maintain clear sens direct alreadi highlight role new monetari polici framework play transit new macroeconom regim incom consumpt measur econom welfar follow steadier cours tri argu interpret link reduct macroeconom uncertainti great moder price uncertainti market pose mani unresolv issu observ scholar would object central bank commit keep inflat low stabl improv communic price stabil object act object forc deed import contribut reduct macroeconom risk find data would also agre aggreg undiversifi risk diminish ought reflect premia financi market pay risk take fraction reduc risk compens stabl acquisit modern economi complement fraction due excess financi sophist abnorm risk toler shortcom risk manag due persist intern imbal steadi appreci commod pass stage let make three remark first exercis ongo warn function whenev amount price risk trade financi market depart trend appear justifi last chang macroeconom fundament communic financi imbal creat overconfid market condit prevail summer vindic ex post start last summer financi market final initi process repric risk appropri level pay attent qualiti asset invest although process signific less order would hope sinc risk premia across wide spectrum asset fallen excess low level return appropri valu accompani process financi deleverag regard necessari develop respect appropri polici respons therefor allow process take place order way possibl play support role whenev mediumterm downsid risk price stabil might emerg along way second crystalclear sinc begin financi turbul would make strict separ monetari polici stanc design exclus deliv price stabil medium term except difficult period implement monetari polici eurosystem credit oper oper design view maintain shortterm rate close polici rate within environ turbul money market concept well understood market particip preserv integr credibl monetari polici also facilit fundament goal preserv firm anchor inflat expect line definit price stabil third let concentr inflat expect environ sustain supplysid shock need consid sequenc shock commod price face past five year confront us difficult identif problem supplysid shock hit one direct prolong period time becom engrain inflat expect happen shock chang natur destabilis expect becom similar demand shock demand shock call shorter polici horizon polici horizon medium term medium term taken least long averag transmiss lag polici action face rise commod price polici horizon could theoret extend circumst describ typic risk repeat sequenc supplysid shock might turn demand disturb longlast implic price stabil made horizon shorter made closer averag transmiss lag point open remark test time financi turbul start last summer increas commod price last year conjur creat challeng environ central bank simultan face fragil financi fabric inflationari pressur origin global commod market precis difficult time benefit solid monetari framework orient price stabil becom appar framework strong mandat price stabil focus firm anchor inflat expect crucial role assign monetari aggreg respect ideal suit challeng current face encod lesson central bank success opt great inflat framework coupl absolut resolv avoid repeat mistak guarante price stabil thus contribut econom growth job creation euro area thank attent figur euro area risk premia macroeconom risk figur us risk premia macroeconom risk figur credit spread euro area us figur futur spread nymex oil spot price wti figur futur curv brent oil price figur number posit noncommerci particip nymex wti oil price figur macroeconom volatil euro area elsewher sinc januari alquist r l kilian learn price crude oil futur unpublish paper univers michigan benati l p surico var analysi great moder forthcom american econom review campbel j j cochran forc habit consumptionbas explan aggreg stockmarket behaviour journal polit economi campbel j r shiller valuat ratio longrun stock market outlook updat advanc behaviour financ volum ii edit n barberi r thaler russel sage foundat new york ny davi m lehnert r rentpric ratio aggreg stock owneroccupi hous mimeo feder reserv board governor domanski d heath financi investor commod market bis quarter review march gorton g k g rouwenhorst fact fantasi commod price nber work paper jagannathan r e r mcgrattan scherbina declin u equiti premium feder reserv bank minneapoli quarter review fall kim d orphanid term structur estim survey data interest rate forecast fed financ econom discuss seri kim d j wright arbitragefre threefactor termstructur model recent behavior longterm yield distanthorizon forward rate fed financ econom discuss seri lettau m c ludvigson j wachter declin equiti premium role macroeconom risk play review financi studi pagano p m pisani riskadjust forecast oil price temi di discussion bank itali plosser c expect yield curv speech given charl plosser presid chief execut offic feder reserv bank philadelphia new jersey banker annual convent palm beach florida march rudebusch g e swanson wu bond yield conundrum macrofin perspect monetari econom studi institut monetari econom studi bank japan vol page decemb sharp stock price expect return inflat board governor feder reserv system fed paper stock j m busi cycl chang nber macroeconom annual cambridg mass mit press defin stream cashflow earn asset dt market price time asset extrem long matur pt satisfi follow ident pt j rt πt j et dt j et expect oper time financi factor use discount expect stream payout rt πt two compon riskfre rate rt could earn compet asset certain return excess rate return πt remuner investor ad risk take shall refer latter factor interchang excess return risk premium refer formula previous footnot interpret dt actual ex post stream dividend payment systemat underpredict dividend stream look forward given vantag point result underestim return expect hold stock current price pt market price grow growth rate actual dividend payment fact problem first explain low equiti risk premia systemat underpredict incom stream limit explanatori power anyth scant evid avail earn expect point opposit direct sharp exampl find period end centuri forecast twoyear nomin earn growth high stabl even though realis twoyear earn growth declin also note higher growth realis payoff per se suffici account price movement entir sampl dividendtopric earningtopric ratio trend secular fall dividendtopric earningstopric ratio actual fact need explain first place see among mani other jagannathan mcgrattan scherbina second concern low term premia foreign offici purchas us bond monetari author countri follow stabl exchang rate polici visàvi us dollar found play littl role factor contribut low longterm interest rate studi interest rate conundrum see rudebusch swanson wu level inflat found correl variabl turn influenc peopl percept degre uncertainti surround macroeconom environ mani standard assetpr model complet market risk premium excess return paid asset uncertain payoff proport volatil consumpt risk avers paramet constant proport model aggreg consumpt volatil stand quantiti risk paramet scale agent risk avers stand price risk crucial subsidiari assumpt behind logic wealth includ human capit tradabl aggreg return interpret gross return asset repres claim aggreg consumpt stock among other show declin volatil appear larg number macroeconom time seri employ growth consumpt growth inflat sector output growth well gdp growth declin confin us economi well visibl vast array economi industrialis develop except correl differ indic equiti valuat consumpt volatil set eleven industrialis countri note see exampl lettau ludvigson wachter figur document evid type correl pervas studi paper detail discuss along line impact fall volatil inflat output growth bond term premium found e g plosser benati surico find role stabilis monetari polici go way toward explain great moder emerg growth new financi intermediari deeper caus exampl recent acceler integr emerg market global economi may led increas global save result grow demand financi servic new financi oper also achiev peaksav year babyboom generat might expand pool resourc need intermedi specialis pension fund fact abund global save whether induc globalis econom process age larg share world popul inde one explan advanc except low bond yield recent observ u lesser extent also euro area exampl model investor prefer display habit format argument util absolut level consumpt level consumpt relat normal level generat timevari risk toler agent risk avers current consumpt around level consid normal base past incomeconsumpt histori circumst inde appli normal time small fraction consumpt avail surplus generat util even small shock consumpt larg effect surplus therefor investor extrem risk avers posit shock incom caus actual consumpt exceed perceiv normal wide margin prolong period time increas agent risk appetit consumpt surplus larger campbel cochran prove equiti risk premium fluctuat due mechan within cashflowdiscount model asset price expound footnot seem explos price dynam generat sequenc negat innov risk premium πt see exampl domanski heath although physic deliveri oil may occur realiti occur rather rare contract instead liquid expir usual lead exchang cash among market particip exampl airlin normal buy jet fuel usual physic supplier purchas futur contract hedg possibl price increas subsequ month price actual rise gain liquid futur contract toward expir offset loss greater cost fuel opposit situat term structur futur price upward slope known trader jargon contango tradit occur less frequent backward financi particip may entic buy sell futur contract differ view futur oil price market averag financi particip net buyer assum averag better seller predict futur spot price need discount price expect expir futur contract motiv purchas risk premium mirror imag seller group will give benefit hold physic inventori oil import role ensur continu product sale face potenti disrupt oil suppli chain jargon inventori provid conveni yield oil market quit sizeabl conveni yield normal invers relat deviat inventori desir size pattern presum reflect belief market particip stabl longrun price oil spot price expect revert eventu focus measur risk premium roll return earn buyer futur base assumpt best predictor futur spot oil price today spot price allow immedi interpret observ spread spot price futur contract trade import longer sampl found accur predictor alquist kilian howev measur risk premium oil futur also conceiv use practis particular central bank forecast exampl pagano pisani regress expost realis risk premium constant degre variabl capac utilis us manufactur proxi state busi cycl take fit valu measur risk premium accumul inventori may sustain increas spot price till middl yet spot price continu rise sinc fall inventori may cours simpli due tighter fundament reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en