Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Is the euro making countries fitter for globalisation?,22-06-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,4346,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen, I am very pleased to be here with you tonight. I would like to thank the European University Institute for its hospitality and the organisers for having put together a very policy-relevant conference. The issue that I would like to address tonight is the extent to which Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) is making its member countries fitter for globalisation. You have been discussing similar issues in the workshop from an academic point of view; I will now try to offer a policy-maker’s perspective. I hope that at least some of my remarks will provide you with some stimulus for future research.I will not try to define precisely the concept of globalisation, but I suggest that it can be understood as the growing interdependence of our economies via an increase in cross-border transactions of goods, labour and capital. One of the main features of globalisation has been the entrance of new players into world markets. The growing integration of emerging Asia, as well as central and eastern European countries, following the collapse of the Soviet Union, has led to a sharpening of the competitive environment and to large changes in the structure of global trade. To be sure, globalisation is posing new challenges to industrial countries, challenges which require action from policy-makers but also from social partners, in order to improve the adaptability of their economies. The issue is not only one of policies but also one of the institutional framework within which each country conducts its policies. These are important matters since globalisation is not a fad and is here to stay.An important question is whether the European institutional framework helps or hinders countries’ efforts to adapt to the challenge of globalisation.I will try to address this question with respect to one specific aspect of the European framework, monetary union.There are two different views on this. According to the first, the best way for a country to face globalisation is to be as flexible as possible, both in the functioning of its markets and in its policies. This view says that exchange rate flexibility is the best option for a country which needs to adapt to globalisation and, pushed to the extreme, would suggest staying out of the euro area. According to an alternative view, globalisation is better dealt with by joining a large currency union such as the euro area.I will look at the two views, knowing that to some extent EU countries, with the exception of two, don’t really have a choice: they are legally committed to joining the euro area. However, it is important to understand whether and how globalisation might affect their membership of the currency union and how to maximise the benefits of participation.I will start by briefly reviewing some theory regarding the main characteristics that make a country fitter for globalisation. I will then examine the extent to which EMU satisfies these characteristics. Despite the predictions from traditional neoclassical and new trade theory as to the effects of trade liberalisation, it is apparent that while some countries are reaping large benefits from globalisation, others are not. Evidence of this can be obtained by looking at changes in the distribution of income across countries. Over the period 1980-2000 income per capita rose in several countries, especially at the lowest end of the range of the global distribution, most notably China and India, but also in several countries at the top. However, most countries in the middle of the income distribution (which represent nearly 20% of the world population) and in the remaining countries located at the lowest end (around 10% of the world population) experienced a much smaller rise in GDP per capita. [2] This supports the view that countries – but also regions within countries, as well as firms and workers – are variously affected by globalisation, and not all of them are necessarily better off in the more open global environment. Why is it so? Does theory help to address this issue? Combining the new trade theory framework originating in the works of Helpman and Krugman [3] with the work on firm heterogeneity by Melitz [4] provides helpful insights. By introducing the presence of imperfectly competitive markets, increasing returns and firm heterogeneity into the models, new trade theories predict that liberalisations of trade and of foreign direct investment (FDI) induce not only trade creation but also, and more importantly, a general reallocation of resources across firms, countries and regions. The most recent literature examines four types of reallocation. [5] First, the self-selection reallocation effect, in which resources are reallocated from the least to the most productive firms, not only across industries but also, and more importantly, within industries. Second, the market size effect, which induces a shift in resources from smaller to larger countries, firms being attracted by the associated greater market potential. Third, the increased sourcing from low-cost countries. Finally, the reallocation effects derived from preferential trade agreements, which favour insiders (countries that are party to the agreement) to the detriment of outsiders. To sum up, the theory suggests that – in general – liberalisation leads to higher welfare for the participant countries. Higher welfare stems from richer product variety, higher productivity, lower average mark-ups and lower average prices, reflecting a more efficient allocation of resources. While this reallocation process arguably leads to higher welfare levels overall, it might create tensions in the short term between prospective gainers and losers. Given this background, what characteristics make a country more likely to be a prospective gainer from globalisation? Going back to the above-mentioned reallocation channels, four critical features contribute to making a country fitter for globalisation:The first is a high degree of accessibility. Countries or regions whose markets are generally more accessible tend to be associated – ceteris paribus – with tougher competition, richer product variety and higher productivity. They also tend to be better export bases and therefore attract a greater number of firms from neighbouring countries. The second important feature is market size. In a world where economies of scale are possible, larger and more integrated markets are characterised by tougher competition, lower mark-ups and lower prices. Therefore firms in a large domestic market are better prepared to cope with the structural changes associated with globalisation than firms in smaller and less integrated domestic markets. The third feature is the Ricardian technological advantage. Technologically advanced regions are associated with higher productivity levels and tougher competition. Again, this generates greater product variety, lower prices and higher welfare. The last (but not least!) factor that can make a country fitter for globalisation is its institutional and political framework. The quality and resilience of domestic institutions are key factors in success amid global competition. A country’s ability to adapt rapidly to external shocks depends on its ability to implement timely structural reforms in areas such as product and labour markets, institutions, innovation and research. This is pivotal in making a country fitter for globalisation. Let me now go back to the central focus of what I would like to say today. Is EMU making euro area countries fitter for globalisation? As always in economics, there is no straightforward answer. EMU may indeed help, in five ways that I submit to you as hypotheses to be further tested in empirical research. First, it has increased the accessibility and centrality of the participating economies. This all the more relevant for small economies, especially at the periphery of the euro area. By eliminating trade barriers and reducing transaction costs across euro area economies, EMU has reduced distances, making these countries more accessible, not only for trade but also for foreign direct investment (FDI). Second, to some extent, and jointly with the Single Market Programme, EMU is creating a larger euro area market out of a collection of smaller national economies. The deepening of trade and financial integration leads to greater competition, a larger scale of production for euro area firms and increased efficiency overall. In other words, thriving in the internal market is not fundamentally different from succeeding in global markets; there is no trade-off. Third, one might also argue that EU integration, by acting as a catalyst for common research and innovation programmes, improves the conditions for further technological gains in euro area countries. Fourth, by creating the need for closer economic policy coordination among the participating economies, EMU has helped to increase incentives for structural reforms within countries. Policy-makers and the public in general in France, Italy and Germany, to give just some examples, are increasingly seeing reforms as the only way to make their economies more competitive. Finally, the institutional framework of EMU is conducive to greater macroeconomic stability, which is very important in enabling a country to cope successfully with globalisation. [6]We must also be aware of several potential counter-arguments. First, by embracing the single monetary policy framework, a country joining monetary union can no longer tailor its monetary policy to national stabilisation needs and must thus have a sufficient degree of flexibility to adapt to external shocks. Second, there might be a risk that, if several aspects of economic policy are put under joint European control, there might be a loss of flexibility in the ability to implement reforms in euro area countries. This might be the reason why structural policies continue to be the competence of national governments. Third, there is some preliminary evidence that the impact of EMU on intra-euro area trade and business cycle harmonisation across countries has been limited. This would seem to suggest that an optimistic line of thinking on the effects of EMU on euro area economies – the “endogenous optimal currency area” reasoning – has not been confirmed yet. I will come back later to the available evidence on the pro-trade effect of EMU. One particularly difficult issue to resolve is the role of the exchange rate in providing the necessary adjustment to external shocks, which may arguably become more important in the era of globalisation. For example, national production may be hit in a very asymmetric way by competition from, say, a low-cost country. Is it not better to let the nominal exchange rate fluctuate in order to correct relative prices, i.e. stay out of a monetary union? This reasoning might be correct in principle. It presumes that the exchange rate can act as a absorber to specific shocks, but there is empirical evidence to suggest that exchange rate fluctuations are often an independent source of shocks rather than a solution to them, especially in small open economies. [7] It is therefore not obvious that abandoning an independent monetary policy and the possibility of country-specific nominal exchange rate fluctuations is necessarily conducive to greater flexibility and macroeconomic stability. These are certainly issues to be further examined in academic research. In this context, it is important to recognise that EMU has highlighted the role of country-specific fundamentals – such as the nature of countries’ specialisations – against the background of a single exchange rate. Take, for example, the differences in competitiveness between German and Italian firms, stemming from a combination of cost differentials and export specialisation patterns which have created contrasting performances. Country-specific structural factors might help to explain why euro area countries reap differing benefits from the globalisation process, while, at the same time, some countries such as the United Kingdom, which do not participate in EMU, might also reap relatively large benefits from globalisation. [8] To better understand the extent to which EMU is making euro area countries fitter for globalisation, let me now briefly review the available empirical evidence on this issue, most notably as regards the trade effects of EMU. Let me first state that this research agenda is a difficult one. First, because we are still at an early stage, and many of the effects are only now developing. Second because, over this period since the introduction of the euro, euro area countries have experienced major structural changes in their trade patterns, which have ultimately led to higher import penetration and increased export share for all trade partners both within and outside the EU and EMU, irrespective of their relative income levels, and for all goods and services at all stages of the production process. One example of such changes is the rise in the import content of euro area exports, for which there is quite some evidence.Some early studies have provided preliminary evidence that monetary union has had positive effects on bilateral trade flows of euro area countries. In recent years, a stream of research has tackled the so-called “Rose” effect, named after the first contributor to the literature. According to recent surveys [9], two main findings can be extracted from the research. First, the effect of the euro on trade is positive – increasing trade by between 5% and 15% – but more limited than the initial estimates by Rose had suggested. [10] Second, the effect does not seem to be exclusive. Use of the euro has so far boosted imports from non-euro area countries almost as much as it has boosted imports from euro area partners. In other words, no substantial trade diversion effect has been identified. It is interesting to compare these findings with the development of euro area trade flows vis-à-vis non-euro area countries following the introduction of the common currency. Between 1998 and 2006, the share of intra-euro area trade in the total (i.e. intra- and extra-euro area) trade in goods of the euro area increased slightly as a share of both total exports (from 48.4% in 1998 to 50.0% in 2006) and total imports (from 47.1 % to 51.2% over the same period). This reflects a smaller increase in intra-euro area trade than in extra-euro area trade. This latter has increased substantially as a percentage of GDP, almost doubling in value terms since just before the launch of the euro.It might also be interesting to ask ourselves why the increase in intra-euro area trade been limited as compared with extra-euro area trade, and whether the predictions from the theory are matched by empirical evidence. Three factors might have played a role in determining the magnitude of the observed EMU effect. First, it is likely that part of the intra-euro area trade-boosting effect of EMU integration was anticipated by other EU trade-facilitating measures, namely those contained in the Single Market Programme. In the run-up to the introduction of the euro, i.e. in the period from 1992 to 1998, there was a particularly intense burst of integration, as ECB analysis has shown. Since Single Market measures were introduced at different times in different countries and EU members differ widely in the pace at which they implement EU directives, it is probably hard for empirical studies to disentangle the “euro effect” from the effect of EU pro-trade directives which have overlapped with EMU in terms of time. Second, the volume of intra-euro area trade already being very substantial – it more than doubled over the second half of the last century – it is understandable that the marginal increase in the last few years has been limited. Third, what we have observed and estimated so far are mostly first-round effects of EMU. Economic theory leads us to expect that more substantial effects are likely to come over time. Another interesting issue is the timing, nature and magnitude of the effects on individual euro area countries. Have the effects been similar or different across countries? The motivation for addressing such an issue is clear. There have been significant differences in euro area countries’ economic performances in the past decade. From 1995 to 2006, the three largest euro area members – Italy, Germany and France – recorded lower growth rates than the other countries, averaging 1.7% per annum against 3.7% for the remainder of euro area. [11] This observation does not fit with my previous assertion based on theoretical models and points to a “the larger the better” hypothesis. What explains this apparent contradiction? Does country size matter as regards fitness for globalisation? My take on this would be that first, when comparing such different economies, one needs to be careful to control for the effects of catching up. GDP growth in Greece was 0.8 percentage point higher than in the euro area as a whole over the period 1995-2006, but average GDP per capita remains 40% below the euro area level. Second, under certain circumstances the presence of FDI might play in favour of smaller countries. In the presence of multinationals, and due to the positive role of FDI, small countries might gain the most from liberalisation since they have the same access to the market as larger countries while sometimes offering more attractive conditions (lower corporate taxes, more flexible regulations). How smaller countries might have a comparative advantage under certain circumstances is illustrated by the Irish economic success of the 1990s. As shown in a recent report by the European Commission, [12] Ireland – which benefited from the launch of the Internal Market in the EU and, at a later stage, from the adoption of the euro – was able to reap large benefits from globalisation, and its economy moved from the periphery of the operations of multinational companies to the centre.. Let me now turn to the main conclusions, and a caveat:Globalisation is triggering major transformations all over the world. The euro area is certainly not exempt from this shock. Against this background of such all-encompassing phenomena, the adoption of the euro and the deepening of EU integration seem to have helped to make euro area countries fitter for globalisation. The euro has not only provided participating countries with a strong and international currency and a credible monetary policy but has also helped them to become better export bases and to diversify their import and exports. EMU has also made the need for cooperation and coordination of economic policy – beyond the scope of monetary policy – more compelling, helping to make the euro area a more cohesive economic area. Nevertheless, there are also signs that further adjustments need to take place, especially in some of the larger countries of the euro area. Reforms should be aimed at raising the ability of the euro area to adjust to the major changes taking place in the global environment. This can be achieved by pursuing an ambitious programme of structural reforms in such fields as product market integration, education and research, labour market flexibility and infrastructure.Implementing these structural policy priorities should raise flexibility and lower the adjustment costs for euro area firms and workers facing the globalisation process. Raising competitiveness is the main condition for making globalisation a success for the citizens of the euro area. Recent developments show that the euro area is up to the challenge. Before concluding, let me mention a caveat to my analysis. What I have said so far assumes that globalisation is a process that countries take as exogenous, as if they were all small, open economies. The reality is a bit different. Globalisation abides by rules of the game defined in international institutions, but also works through bilateral relations. We know that no market can function without a proper legal and political infrastructure, and the global marketplace is no exception. In this context, large players may have an advantage over smaller players, as the former can have a larger say in defining the rules of the game and in ensuring that these rules are implemented. From this viewpoint, participation in the euro area, which has the second world currency and is second-largest economic area in the world, should bring some advantage to its members. [13]Unfortunately this is not yet fully recognised. The euro area is still not organised in international fora in a way that would allow it to influence decisions and events to the extent its economic weight would suggest. As far as exchange rates are concerned, the euro area is well organised and participates actively in G7 and G3 meetings. It has recently participated in the IMF multilateral consultation process on global imbalances. However, when it comes to other issues related to international trade and finance, the euro area countries still act individually, although at times coordinating their positions. Clearly, the sum of their influence does not match that of a united representation. I will not dwell on the reasons for this situation, having written extensively on the issue. To be sure, we have a rather paradoxical situation whereby European citizens would like to “govern” the process of globalisation, in order to ensure that its more problematic developments are adequately managed. However, to actively participate in the governance of globalisation European countries must pool their forces and give a more prominent role to a European voice. This is a step that some governments are not yet ready to make, as they fear losing power and legitimacy. This may be one of the reasons why Europe is seen by its citizens as not contributing to their well-being as they would expect.Moving to a stronger European say in the global scene will require leadership that evidently is not yet present. But this lack of ambition cannot be assumed to last forever. Thank you for your attention. Baldwin R. E. (2006) “In or out: does it make a difference? An evidence based analysis of the trade effects of the euro’’, CEPR. Baldwin R. E. and D. Taglioni (2004) “Positive OCA criteria: microfundations for the Rose effect’’, March. (http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=936732). Baldwin, R. and D. Taglioni (2006) “Gravity for dummies, dummies for gravity”, NBER Working Paper No 12516.Barr, D., F. Breedon and D. Miles (2003) “Life on the outside: economic conditions and prospects outside euroland” Economic Policy, pp. 573-613.Berger, H. and Nitsch V. (2005) “Zooming out: the trade effect of the euro in perspective” CES Working Paper No 1435.Bun, M. J. G. and F. J. G. M. Klaassen (2002) “Has the euro increased trade?”, Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper, TI 2002-108/2.Baumann U. and F. di Mauro (2007) “Globalisation and euro area trade: interactions and challenges’’, ECB Occasional Paper No 55. Behrens K., G. Mion and G. I. P Ottaviano (2007) “Industry reallocations in a globalizing economy’’, CEPR Discussion Paper No 6049, January. Bernard A. B., Redding S., and P. K. Schott (2004) “Comparative advantage and heterogeneous firms’’, NBER Working Paper No 10668, August. De Nardis, S. and C. Vicarelli (2003) “Currency unions and trade: the special case of EMU”, World Review of Economics, 139 (4), pp. 625-649.De Souza, L. V. (2002) “Trade effects of monetary integration in large, mature economies: a primer on European Monetary Union”, Kiel Working Paper No 1137.European Commission (2005) “Reaping the benefits from globalisation: the Irish case’’, in “The EU economy 2005 review: Rising international economic integration, opportunities and challenges”. Farrant, K. and G. Peersman (2006): “Is the exchange rate a shock absorber or a source of shocks? New empirical evidence”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 38 (3), pp. 939-961.Flam, H. and H. Nordström (2003) “Trade volume effects of the euro: aggregate and sector estimates”, Institute for International Economic Studies, unpublished.Freeman R. (2006) “Labour market imbalances: shortages, or surpluses, or fish stories?’’ Boston Federal Reserve Economic Conference, “Global imbalances – as giants evolve,’’ Chatham, Massachusetts, June 14-16 2006. Helpman E. and P. Krugman (1985) “Market structure and foreign trade: increasing returns, imperfect competition and the international economy’’, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. HM Treasury (2005a) “Globalisation and the UK: strength and opportunity to meet the economic challenge”, December. HM Treasury (2005b): “Long-term global economic challenges and opportunities for Europe”, March.Leamer E. E. (2007) “A flat world, a level playing field, a small world after all, or none of the above? A review of Thomas. J. Friedman’s The world is flat”, Journal of Economic Literature, March, pp. 83-126. Lucas R. E. (1990) review of Trade policy and market structure by E. Helpman and P. R. Krugman, Journal of Political Economy, 1990, Vol. 98-3. Melitz, M. (2003) “The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry productivity’’, Econometrica, 71, pp. 1695-1725. Melitz, M. and G. I. P. Ottaviano (2005) “Market size, trade, and productivity’’, NBER Working Paper No 11393, June 2005. Mongelli F. P., E. Dorrucci and A. Itai (2005) “What does European institutional integration tell us about trade integration’’, ECB Occasional Paper No 40.Micco, A., E. Stein and G. Ordoñez (2003) “The Currency union effect on trade: early evidence From EMU”, Economic Policy, pp. 316-356.Piscitelli, L. (2003) mimeo, available from HM Treasury.Rose, A. K. (2000) “One money, one market: estimating the effect of common currencies on trade”, Economic Policy 30, pp. 9-45.[1] The author would like to thank Daria Taglioni and Arthur Saint-Guilhem for their input in the preparation of this speech, and Filippo di Mauro and Livio Stracca for their useful comments. The opinions expressed in this speech are those of the author and not of the institution he represents.[2] See Leamer (2006). [3] See Helpman and Krugman (1985). [4] See Melitz (2003). [5] See Melitz and Ottaviano (2005) and Behrens, Mion and Ottaviano (2007). [6] See HM Treasury (2005a).[7] See Farrant and Peersman (2006).[8] For an assessment of the UK response to the challenges of globalisation see HM Treasury (2005a).[9] See Baldwin-Taglioni (2004) and Baldwin (2006). [10] Rose (2000) launched the recent wave of research on the trade effect of currency unions by finding that the nations in a currency union trade 235% more than expected. An extensive body of literature has criticised many aspects of Rose’s methodology. The current consensus seems to be that the trade effect on the worldwide dataset is small and possibly insignificant. Recent work – including Micco, Stein and Ordoñez (2003), Flam and Nordström (2003), Berger and Nitsch (2005), Barr, Breedon and Miles (2003), Bun and Klaassen (2002), De Souza (2002), Piscitelli (2003), Baldwin and Taglioni (2004, 2006), Baldwin, Skudelny and Taglioni (2004), and De Nardis and Vicarelli (2003) – has investigated the euro’s impact on bilateral trade flows. Most of these studies find a positive but small trade effect, typically in the 5% to 20% range, although some papers, such as Berger and Nitsch (2005), suggest that the effect is statistically insignificant.[11] The average includes, for instance, 6.9% for Ireland, 4.0% for Greece and 3.8% for Finland. Also note that the growth rate of real GDP per capita has been higher in 9 out of 13 euro area countries than in the United States since the introduction of the euro (though two of these countries, Greece and Slovenia, joined the euro area at a later date).[12] See European Commission (2005). [13] See HM Treasury (2005b). Among the key policy challenges for Europe, “efforts to shape global trends and become more outward-looking” is mentioned, along with the creation of a dynamic and competitive Single Market and other key initiatives.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen pleas tonight would like thank european univers institut hospit organis put togeth policyrelev confer issu would like address tonight extent econom monetari union emu make member countri fitter globalis discuss similar issu workshop academ point view tri offer policymak perspect hope least remark provid stimulus futur research tri defin precis concept globalis suggest understood grow interdepend economi via increas crossbord transact good labour capit one main featur globalis entranc new player world market grow integr emerg asia well central eastern european countri follow collaps soviet union led sharpen competit environ larg chang structur global trade sure globalis pose new challeng industri countri challeng requir action policymak also social partner order improv adapt economi issu one polici also one institut framework within countri conduct polici import matter sinc globalis fad stay import question whether european institut framework help hinder countri effort adapt challeng globalis tri address question respect one specif aspect european framework monetari union two differ view accord first best way countri face globalis flexibl possibl function market polici view say exchang rate flexibl best option countri need adapt globalis push extrem would suggest stay euro area accord altern view globalis better dealt join larg currenc union euro area look two view know extent eu countri except two realli choic legal commit join euro area howev import understand whether globalis might affect membership currenc union maximis benefit particip start briefli review theori regard main characterist make countri fitter globalis examin extent emu satisfi characterist despit predict tradit neoclass new trade theori effect trade liberalis appar countri reap larg benefit globalis other evid obtain look chang distribut incom across countri period incom per capita rose sever countri especi lowest end rang global distribut notabl china india also sever countri top howev countri middl incom distribut repres near world popul remain countri locat lowest end around world popul experienc much smaller rise gdp per capita support view countri also region within countri well firm worker various affect globalis necessarili better open global environ theori help address issu combin new trade theori framework origin work helpman krugman work firm heterogen melitz provid help insight introduc presenc imperfect competit market increas return firm heterogen model new trade theori predict liberalis trade foreign direct invest fdi induc trade creation also import general realloc resourc across firm countri region recent literatur examin four type realloc first selfselect realloc effect resourc realloc least product firm across industri also import within industri second market size effect induc shift resourc smaller larger countri firm attract associ greater market potenti third increas sourc lowcost countri final realloc effect deriv preferenti trade agreement favour insid countri parti agreement detriment outsid sum theori suggest general liberalis lead higher welfar particip countri higher welfar stem richer product varieti higher product lower averag markup lower averag price reflect effici alloc resourc realloc process arguabl lead higher welfar level overal might creat tension short term prospect gainer loser given background characterist make countri like prospect gainer globalis go back abovement realloc channel four critic featur contribut make countri fitter globalis first high degre access countri region whose market general access tend associ ceteri paribus tougher competit richer product varieti higher product also tend better export base therefor attract greater number firm neighbour countri second import featur market size world economi scale possibl larger integr market characteris tougher competit lower markup lower price therefor firm larg domest market better prepar cope structur chang associ globalis firm smaller less integr domest market third featur ricardian technolog advantag technolog advanc region associ higher product level tougher competit generat greater product varieti lower price higher welfar last least factor make countri fitter globalis institut polit framework qualiti resili domest institut key factor success amid global competit countri abil adapt rapid extern shock depend abil implement time structur reform area product labour market institut innov research pivot make countri fitter globalis let go back central focus would like say today emu make euro area countri fitter globalis alway econom straightforward answer emu may inde help five way submit hypothes test empir research first increas access central particip economi relev small economi especi peripheri euro area elimin trade barrier reduc transact cost across euro area economi emu reduc distanc make countri access trade also foreign direct invest fdi second extent joint singl market programm emu creat larger euro area market collect smaller nation economi deepen trade financi integr lead greater competit larger scale product euro area firm increas effici overal word thrive intern market fundament differ succeed global market tradeoff third one might also argu eu integr act catalyst common research innov programm improv condit technolog gain euro area countri fourth creat need closer econom polici coordin among particip economi emu help increas incent structur reform within countri policymak public general franc itali germani give exampl increas see reform way make economi competit final institut framework emu conduc greater macroeconom stabil import enabl countri cope success globalis must also awar sever potenti counterargu first embrac singl monetari polici framework countri join monetari union longer tailor monetari polici nation stabilis need must thus suffici degre flexibl adapt extern shock second might risk sever aspect econom polici put joint european control might loss flexibl abil implement reform euro area countri might reason structur polici continu compet nation govern third preliminari evid impact emu intraeuro area trade busi cycl harmonis across countri limit would seem suggest optimist line think effect emu euro area economi endogen optim currenc area reason confirm yet come back later avail evid protrad effect emu one particular difficult issu resolv role exchang rate provid necessari adjust extern shock may arguabl becom import era globalis exampl nation product may hit asymmetr way competit say lowcost countri better let nomin exchang rate fluctuat order correct relat price e stay monetari union reason might correct principl presum exchang rate act absorb specif shock empir evid suggest exchang rate fluctuat often independ sourc shock rather solut especi small open economi therefor obvious abandon independ monetari polici possibl countryspecif nomin exchang rate fluctuat necessarili conduc greater flexibl macroeconom stabil certain issu examin academ research context import recognis emu highlight role countryspecif fundament natur countri specialis background singl exchang rate take exampl differ competit german italian firm stem combin cost differenti export specialis pattern creat contrast perform countryspecif structur factor might help explain euro area countri reap differ benefit globalis process time countri unit kingdom particip emu might also reap relat larg benefit globalis better understand extent emu make euro area countri fitter globalis let briefli review avail empir evid issu notabl regard trade effect emu let first state research agenda difficult one first still earli stage mani effect develop second period sinc introduct euro euro area countri experienc major structur chang trade pattern ultim led higher import penetr increas export share trade partner within outsid eu emu irrespect relat incom level good servic stage product process one exampl chang rise import content euro area export quit evid earli studi provid preliminari evid monetari union posit effect bilater trade flow euro area countri recent year stream research tackl socal rose effect name first contributor literatur accord recent survey two main find extract research first effect euro trade posit increas trade limit initi estim rose suggest second effect seem exclus use euro far boost import noneuro area countri almost much boost import euro area partner word substanti trade divers effect identifi interest compar find develop euro area trade flow visàvi noneuro area countri follow introduct common currenc share intraeuro area trade total e intra extraeuro area trade good euro area increas slight share total export total import period reflect smaller increas intraeuro area trade extraeuro area trade latter increas substanti percentag gdp almost doubl valu term sinc launch euro might also interest ask increas intraeuro area trade limit compar extraeuro area trade whether predict theori match empir evid three factor might play role determin magnitud observ emu effect first like part intraeuro area tradeboost effect emu integr anticip eu tradefacilit measur name contain singl market programm runup introduct euro e period particular intens burst integr ecb analysi shown sinc singl market measur introduc differ time differ countri eu member differ wide pace implement eu direct probabl hard empir studi disentangl euro effect effect eu protrad direct overlap emu term time second volum intraeuro area trade alreadi substanti doubl second half last centuri understand margin increas last year limit third observ estim far most firstround effect emu econom theori lead us expect substanti effect like come time anoth interest issu time natur magnitud effect individu euro area countri effect similar differ across countri motiv address issu clear signific differ euro area countri econom perform past decad three largest euro area member itali germani franc record lower growth rate countri averag per annum remaind euro area observ fit previous assert base theoret model point larger better hypothesi explain appar contradict countri size matter regard fit globalis take would first compar differ economi one need care control effect catch gdp growth greec percentag point higher euro area whole period averag gdp per capita remain euro area level second certain circumst presenc fdi might play favour smaller countri presenc multin due posit role fdi small countri might gain liberalis sinc access market larger countri sometim offer attract condit lower corpor tax flexibl regul smaller countri might compar advantag certain circumst illustr irish econom success shown recent report european commiss ireland benefit launch intern market eu later stage adopt euro abl reap larg benefit globalis economi move peripheri oper multin compani centr let turn main conclus caveat globalis trigger major transform world euro area certain exempt shock background allencompass phenomena adopt euro deepen eu integr seem help make euro area countri fitter globalis euro provid particip countri strong intern currenc credibl monetari polici also help becom better export base diversifi import export emu also made need cooper coordin econom polici beyond scope monetari polici compel help make euro area cohes econom area nevertheless also sign adjust need take place especi larger countri euro area reform aim rais abil euro area adjust major chang take place global environ achiev pursu ambiti programm structur reform field product market integr educ research labour market flexibl infrastructur implement structur polici prioriti rais flexibl lower adjust cost euro area firm worker face globalis process rais competit main condit make globalis success citizen euro area recent develop show euro area challeng conclud let mention caveat analysi said far assum globalis process countri take exogen small open economi realiti bit differ globalis abid rule game defin intern institut also work bilater relat know market function without proper legal polit infrastructur global marketplac except context larg player may advantag smaller player former larger say defin rule game ensur rule implement viewpoint particip euro area second world currenc secondlargest econom area world bring advantag member unfortun yet fulli recognis euro area still organis intern fora way would allow influenc decis event extent econom weight would suggest far exchang rate concern euro area well organis particip activ g g meet recent particip imf multilater consult process global imbal howev come issu relat intern trade financ euro area countri still act individu although time coordin posit clear sum influenc match unit represent dwell reason situat written extens issu sure rather paradox situat wherebi european citizen would like govern process globalis order ensur problemat develop adequ manag howev activ particip govern globalis european countri must pool forc give promin role european voic step govern yet readi make fear lose power legitimaci may one reason europ seen citizen contribut wellb would expect move stronger european say global scene requir leadership evid yet present lack ambit cannot assum last forev thank attent baldwin r e make differ evid base analysi trade effect euro cepr baldwin r e d taglioni posit oca criteria microfund rose effect march http paper ssrn comsol paper cfm abstract_id baldwin r d taglioni graviti dummi dummi graviti nber work paper barr d f breedon d mile life outsid econom condit prospect outsid euroland econom polici pp berger h nitsch v zoom trade effect euro perspect ces work paper bun m j g f j g m klaassen euro increas trade tinbergen institut discuss paper ti baumann u f di mauro globalis euro area trade interact challeng ecb occasion paper behren k g mion g p ottaviano industri realloc global economi cepr discuss paper januari bernard b red p k schott compar advantag heterogen firm nber work paper august de nardi c vicarelli currenc union trade special case emu world review econom pp de souza l v trade effect monetari integr larg matur economi primer european monetari union kiel work paper european commiss reap benefit globalis irish case eu economi review rise intern econom integr opportun challeng farrant k g peersman exchang rate shock absorb sourc shock new empir evid journal money credit bank vol pp flam h h nordström trade volum effect euro aggreg sector estim institut intern econom studi unpublish freeman r labour market imbal shortag surplus fish stori boston feder reserv econom confer global imbal giant evolv chatham massachusett june helpman e p krugman market structur foreign trade increas return imperfect competit intern economi mit press cambridg ma hm treasuri globalis uk strength opportun meet econom challeng decemb hm treasuri b longterm global econom challeng opportun europ march leamer e e flat world level play field small world none review thoma j friedman world flat journal econom literatur march pp luca r e review trade polici market structur e helpman p r krugman journal polit economi vol melitz m impact trade intraindustri realloc aggreg industri product econometrica pp melitz m g p ottaviano market size trade product nber work paper june mongelli f p e dorrucci itai european institut integr tell us trade integr ecb occasion paper micco e stein g ordoñez currenc union effect trade earli evid emu econom polici pp piscitelli l mimeo avail hm treasuri rose k one money one market estim effect common currenc trade econom polici pp author would like thank daria taglioni arthur saintguilhem input prepar speech filippo di mauro livio stracca use comment opinion express speech author institut repres see leamer see helpman krugman see melitz see melitz ottaviano behren mion ottaviano see hm treasuri see farrant peersman assess uk respons challeng globalis see hm treasuri see baldwintaglioni baldwin rose launch recent wave research trade effect currenc union find nation currenc union trade expect extens bodi literatur criticis mani aspect rose methodolog current consensus seem trade effect worldwid dataset small possibl insignific recent work includ micco stein ordoñez flam nordström berger nitsch barr breedon mile bun klaassen de souza piscitelli baldwin taglioni baldwin skudelni taglioni de nardi vicarelli investig euro impact bilater trade flow studi find posit small trade effect typic rang although paper berger nitsch suggest effect statist insignific averag includ instanc ireland greec finland also note growth rate real gdp per capita higher euro area countri unit state sinc introduct euro though two countri greec slovenia join euro area later date see european commiss see hm treasuri b among key polici challeng europ effort shape global trend becom outwardlook mention along creation dynam competit singl market key initi reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en