Peter Praet: The role of the central bank and euro area governments in times of crisis,19-04-2012,European Central Bank,ECB,3135,"<p>Since 2007, we have constantly been confronted with exceptionally tense financial and economic conditions. When the tensions in the financial markets first emerged in the summer of 2007, they were perceived as a liquidity shock. However, the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008 – the first climax of the crisis – revealed more fundamental fragilities in the global financial system. The accumulated credit excesses, paired with the complex cross-country linkages in the financial markets, quickly exacerbated the financial market tensions on the other side of the Atlantic, transforming them into a crisis of global dimensions. The resulting Great Recession of 2009 affected virtually all industrialised countries and caused other weaknesses in the economic and financial system to be crystallised. Specifically, the severe economic contraction worsened the fiscal positions in many countries around the world, particularly in those that already had sustained public or private debt imbalances before the crisis. The subsequent tensions in some sovereign debt markets have spilled back into the financial markets. As safe assets, sovereign bonds play a key role in financial systems. The weakening of this status of being a safe asset in some countries added renewed fragility to financial institutions.Five years into the crisis, there remain manifold challenges to global financial and economic stability. The situation continues to be extraordinarily complex, and there are no easy solutions on offer. The exceptional dimension of the crisis – the real threat it presents for the prosperity of the people in Europe and around the world – requires a forceful response by national and international authorities. However, several factors are limiting the capacity of authorities to react around to world. Most importantly, the weak fiscal positions of many countries are placing severe constraints on the capacity of governments to – somehow – spend their way out of the crisis. In some cases, this has led to calls on monetary authorities to act more. In addressing the crisis, we should not forget that policy responses shape future expectations. We cannot afford to take measures that entail the risk of adverse economic consequences, such as moral hazard in fiscal policies or an unanchoring of inflation expectations. In my remarks, I will focus on the euro area’s framework for economic governance and on the crisis resolution measures taken in there. In view of enormous challenges that had to be dealt with, both the ECB and the euro area governments have taken important policy measures. Let me first briefly review the economic governance of the euro area at the outset.The most distinctive feature of EMU is that it combines a single monetary policy with largely decentralised fiscal and economic policies. In such a framework, a key challenge is to ensure a high degree of self-responsibility or, expressed in other words, to ensure that unsound national policies do not even materialise and do not, in any event, undermine the stability of the common currency. These challenges were abundantly clear to the founding fathers of EMU: rules on fiscal spending were laid down in the Maastricht Treaty, and supplemented by systems for the coordination of economic policy. Together, they are now generally referred to as the European economic governance framework.The fiscal constraints in EMU – given the two reference values, namely the ceilings of 3% of GDP on budget deficits and of 60% of GDP on government debt – are probably the best known elements of the fiscal framework. But the framework was, in fact, far more comprehensive, even before the recent reform of economic governance. A set of rules imposed preventive limits on government borrowing, requiring Member States to achieve close-to-balance budgets over the business cycle. These rules were meant to place debt on a sustainable footing and, at the same time, to create fiscal room for manoeuvre for “rainy days”. A surveillance procedure was also put in place to verify that all the parties involved complied with the agreed fiscal targets. And in the case of non-compliance, a “corrective arm” was envisaged, starting with warnings and ultimately culminating in sanctions, in order to ensure that governments would quickly reduce any excessive deficit through progressive corrective steps.The fiscal rules were complemented by additional elements, such as the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines, which were introduced as a tool to ensure a convergence of economic policies and performance across Member States and to foster economic growth and employment, as well as to attain the ambitious goals set in the “Lisbon Agenda”.How has the European framework for economic governance been applied and how well has it served Europe?It is true that the euro area has fared reasonably well in macroeconomic terms. For instance, real GDP growth per capita in the euro area has not lagged behind that in the United States. Over the same period under review, more jobs were created in the euro area than in the United States. However, the European governance framework was unable to ensure fiscal soundness and macroeconomic stability in all euro area Member States. Some Member States had already accumulated large fiscal imbalances in good times. The fiscal policy framework suffered from weak implementation, in particular after the reform of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) in 2005. Other macroeconomic imbalances, particularly divergences in competitiveness, were also allowed to develop over a number of years prior to the crisis. In some Member States, wage increases significantly exceeded productivity gains and this, in turn, caused unit labour costs to rise substantially.When the global financial crisis hit the real economy in 2009, the budgetary effects of automatic stabilisers in the tax and benefit systems, the fiscal stimulus packages introduced by governments and the support provided to the financial sector led to a sharp deterioration in the fiscal positions of all euro area countries. External and domestic imbalances mounted, especially in weaker euro area countries. This led to severe tensions in financial markets and to the emergence of risks of adverse spillovers to the rest of the euro area.One could divide into four categories the ways in which countries could have addressed sovereign debt problems in the past. First, and most naturally, governments pursue a course of fiscal consolidation. Second, as tended to be the case in some countries, central banks can monetise public debt, i.e. finance government debt and deficits by issuing additional money. Third, governments can decide not to honour their obligations and simply default on their outstanding debt. Finally, as occurred in a few exceptional cases, third parties can decide to assume the debt and deficits of their vulnerable counterparts, thus typically transferring resources from economically stronger to weaker entities.European Union legislation clearly rules out the monetisation and bail-out options. Article 123 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union prohibits any form of monetary financing of public debt or deficits; Article 124 forbids privileged access to financial institutions by the public sector; and the “no-bail-out clause” in Article 125 precludes that one Member State becomes liable for the liabilities of another Member State. These articles are based on sound economic principles. Monetisation would inevitably lead to higher inflation, with the well-known costs to economic prosperity. Transfers between euro area Member States would – particularly in the absence of far more rigid fiscal rules and sanction mechanisms at European level – risk creating significant moral hazard effects in the beneficiary countries, and would thus further undermine the long-term economic stability in the euro area.Also, the ECB has long warned against the third option – the restructuring of sovereign debt in the euro area. The exchanging of debt, as in the case of Greece, should remain a unique event. In this respect, it must be noted that the contagion effects of such measures are difficult to control, as has been demonstrated by the high volatility of financial markets over the past year. In addition, debt restructuring does not in itself address the underlying economic fiscal and structural imbalances.There is only one way of solving the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area countries: governments should pursue policies of strict fiscal consolidation and far-reaching structural reforms so as to address macroeconomic imbalances and return their countries to sustainable paths of growth. The ECB should support the adjustment process in the Member States in the best manner possible, namely by providing price stability in the euro area as a whole.Let me now address the measures taken by the ECB in response to the crisis, before turning to the response by the euro area governments.During the crisis, the ECB has been confronted with unprecedented threats to monetary stability in the euro area. Broadly speaking, these have come from two sources: first, the deflationary forces stemming from the economic downturn and, second, the impairment of the transmission of its monetary policy, which reflected to the growing tensions in financial markets. The ECB had to react decisively to these challenges. First, we used our standard monetary policy measures to address the downward pressures on price stability that resulted from the sharp slowdown in economic activity in the crisis. In full consistency with our mandate, we reduced our key policy interest rate rapidly between October 2008 and May 2009, from 4.25% to 1%. In other words, we reduced our policy rate faster than any euro area country has ever done in recent history.Given that the ECB has ensured that inflation expectations in the euro area as a whole remain very solidly anchored, we have been able to maintain an accommodative monetary policy stance over the past four years. Second, we took additional non-standard measures to ensure that our interest rate decisions were transmitted effectively to the broader economy, despite the volatilities in the financial sector. If banks cannot easily access the money market or other sources of finance, they may not extend credit to households and companies, to the detriment of economic growth and employment.At the outset of the crisis in 2007, the ECB reacted immediately to the rapidly worsening liquidity conditions and heightened credit risk, particularly in the interbank markets. When stress in the financial markets re-emerged in the autumn of last year, the Governing Council of the ECB again took a series of measures to enhance the provision of liquidity to the banking system and to actively support lending, notably introducing two very long-term refinancing operations with a maturity of three years, which were conducted in December last year and in February this year. The exceptionally long maturity of these operations gave banks a longer horizon for their liquidity planning. It is also helping them to deleverage in a balanced and orderly manner over the medium term, thereby avoiding “fire sales” of assets and a downscaling of longer-term lending.At the same time, it is crucial that all the crisis measures taken by the ECB to ensure monetary stability in the euro area – the standard and the non-standard – do not create adverse incentives for market participants or unanchor inflationary expectations. For this reason, the ECB has been very clear that the measures it has taken are designed to be temporary in nature. Let me also emphasise that our non-standard measures do not in any way impinge upon our capacity to tighten our monetary policy stance in response to inflationary pressures. In all our actions, we have been careful to keep inflation expectations well-anchored and have remained faithful to our mandate to preserve price stability in the euro area over the medium term. Our mandate is what has guided, and will continue to guide, all our monetary policy decisions. But the success of the ECB’s crisis measures in maintaining monetary stability in the euro area should not let anyone believe that monetary policy is the medicine that can solve the underlying, more structural problems in the euro area. The lasting resolution of the crisis is the responsibility of the euro area governments.Euro area governments face three main challenges. First, they need to address the internal and external macroeconomic imbalances. Second, they have to restore confidence in, and stability to, the European financial system. Third, they must deal with the remaining shortcomings in the institutional design of EMU. Let me elaborate on these factors in turn.First, the rebalancing of the euro area economies requires, first and foremost, that public sector expenditure is brought back to a sustainable path and that the debt overhang is reduced. This is, of course, particularly true for those euro area countries that are currently under an EU/IMF programme or are experiencing disruptions in their sovereign debt markets. Much remains to be done, but we should not forget the steps that have already been taken – although there is no room for complacency. Based on a direct estimation of revenue and spending (rather than on the cyclically adjusted primary balance), the cumulative fiscal consolidation achieved thus far is in excess of 10% of GDP in each of the three countries under EU/IMF programmes. While some countries have, most regrettably, fallen behind the targets in their programme, the consolidation efforts are significant in absolute terms. One of the reasons why countries did not reach their headline deficit targets is to be found in the economic headwinds they are experiencing. Negative economic growth, higher interest payments and higher social security spending have led to quasi-automatic increases in expenditure and obscure the fiscal consolidation efforts. This stresses the importance of the implementation of well-designed and ambitious fiscal adjustment programmes being accompanied by growth-enhancing structural reforms.There is no doubt that the long-term effects of fiscal consolidation on growth and employment are positive and significant. Whereas fiscal consolidation may have a dampening effect on economic activity in the short run, the extent to which it does so depends on several factors, such as the composition of the fiscal adjustment. National authorities need to set ambitious and credible targets, and to stick to them. Even small deviations from the targets can quickly jeopardise the progress made and undermine confidence.To address imbalances, countries also need to take structural measures and deal with market rigidities. Suitable structural reforms can have a positive impact on growth and employment already in the relatively short term, and can thus also help to mitigate the negative effects of consolidation. Structural adjustment nevertheless remains difficult, but not impossible. This is proved by the experience in the Federal Republic of Germany over the past years. Losses in competitiveness after the reunification boom in the early 1990s were effectively addressed by means of moderate wage growth over extended periods of time. At the same time, the German experience shows how well-targeted structural reforms strengthen potential growth and boost employment. The labour and welfare reforms contributed significantly to positive economic developments in Germany over past years. In the remaining time, let me also briefly address the other two challenges faced by euro area governments, namely the instability of the financial markets and the remaining deficiencies in the European economic governance framework. Banks should continue to strengthen their balance sheets. The financial system has to return to fulfilling its primary task of providing credit to the real economy. But, as I have said before, euro area governments also have to do their part. Sound fiscal positions across the euro area will contribute significantly to strengthening confidence in a banking sector that relies heavily on government bonds as safe assets and for use as collateral. At the same time, euro area governments need to further strengthen the macro-prudential framework at the national and the European level. As you know, the European Systemic Risk Board is developing tools to identify and address potential future sources of systemic risk in the EU. And the three new European supervisory authorities – for banking, for insurance and occupational pensions, and for securities and markets – are strengthening our focus on spillovers within the EU’s financial system. However, one important element in the framework for macro-prudential supervision in the euro area is still missing. We still have no clear mechanism in place to deal with the systemic risk emanating from large cross-border financial institutions. We should intensify ongoing work on the establishment of a mechanism for the resolution of bank failures at the European level.This brings me to the third challenge that euro area governments face: the elimination of remaining institutional deficits in the euro area governance framework. European governments have made considerable progress on this front. In particular, they have reinforced the Stability and Growth Pact, with more “automaticity” and less room for discretion in the application of the preventive and corrective arms. In addition, the European fiscal compact will ensure strong national budgetary frameworks in order to facilitate compliance with the government’s obligations under the Stability and Growth Pact. And EU Member States have introduced a surveillance mechanism that aims to prevent and correct macroeconomic imbalances within the EU.It is now essential that the new governance framework is implemented to the letter. Our governance framework has lost much credibility that must now be carefully reacquired. Here, particular responsibility rests with the national authorities. In particular, the European governance framework will function best if national finance ministries conscientiously perform their role with respect to multilateral surveillance. The sovereign debt crisis has taught us unequivocally that – in spite of the no-bail-out clause in Article 125 of the Treaty – the euro area countries are not insulated from one another. In an integrated single European market with a single European currency, spillover effects from one Member State to the other should make us all take a strong interest in the pursuit of sound fiscal and structural policies by our European partners.Because of the close integration of the European economies, governments have also set up a European crisis resolution mechanism, the European Stability Mechanism. Its purpose is not, as some have argued, to bail out euro area countries that have failed to pursue sound economic policies. Its stated purpose is to safeguard financial stability if one or more countries endanger the euro area as a whole. To conclude, the ECB’s policies have been guided by price stability considerations, with policies targeted at those elements of the crisis that threatened to prevent it from fulfilling its mandate.Responsibility for the resolution of the sovereign debt crisis rests with the governments of the euro area Member States. Major progress has been made in terms of fiscal consolidation and the enhancement of the euro area governance framework. But we are not there yet. Governments need to urgently implement their fiscal consolidation programmes and to accompany these with well-designed structural reforms in the labour and product markets. The new fiscal and macroeconomic rules of the European governance framework need to be implemented to the letter. And the crisis management mechanisms at the euro area level need to be designed so as to ensure financial stability in the euro area.[1] I would like to thank Maximilian Freier and Gianluigi Ferrucci for their contribution in the preparation of this speech.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",sinc constant confront except tens financi econom condit tension financi market first emerg summer perceiv liquid shock howev collaps lehman brother septemb first climax crisi reveal fundament fragil global financi system accumul credit excess pair complex crosscountri linkag financi market quick exacerb financi market tension side atlant transform crisi global dimens result great recess affect virtual industrialis countri caus weak econom financi system crystallis specif sever econom contract worsen fiscal posit mani countri around world particular alreadi sustain public privat debt imbal crisi subsequ tension sovereign debt market spill back financi market safe asset sovereign bond play key role financi system weaken status safe asset countri ad renew fragil financi institut five year crisi remain manifold challeng global financi econom stabil situat continu extraordinarili complex easi solut offer except dimens crisi real threat present prosper peopl europ around world requir forc respons nation intern author howev sever factor limit capac author react around world import weak fiscal posit mani countri place sever constraint capac govern somehow spend way crisi case led call monetari author act address crisi forget polici respons shape futur expect cannot afford take measur entail risk advers econom consequ moral hazard fiscal polici unanchor inflat expect remark focus euro area framework econom govern crisi resolut measur taken view enorm challeng dealt ecb euro area govern taken import polici measur let first briefli review econom govern euro area outset distinct featur emu combin singl monetari polici larg decentralis fiscal econom polici framework key challeng ensur high degre selfrespons express word ensur unsound nation polici even materialis event undermin stabil common currenc challeng abund clear found father emu rule fiscal spend laid maastricht treati supplement system coordin econom polici togeth general refer european econom govern framework fiscal constraint emu given two refer valu name ceil gdp budget deficit gdp govern debt probabl best known element fiscal framework framework fact far comprehens even recent reform econom govern set rule impos prevent limit govern borrow requir member state achiev closetobal budget busi cycl rule meant place debt sustain foot time creat fiscal room manoeuvr raini day surveil procedur also put place verifi parti involv compli agre fiscal target case noncompli correct arm envisag start warn ultim culmin sanction order ensur govern would quick reduc excess deficit progress correct step fiscal rule complement addit element broad econom polici guidelin introduc tool ensur converg econom polici perform across member state foster econom growth employ well attain ambiti goal set lisbon agenda european framework econom govern appli well serv europ true euro area fare reason well macroeconom term instanc real gdp growth per capita euro area lag behind unit state period review job creat euro area unit state howev european govern framework unabl ensur fiscal sound macroeconom stabil euro area member state member state alreadi accumul larg fiscal imbal good time fiscal polici framework suffer weak implement particular reform stabil growth pact sgp macroeconom imbal particular diverg competit also allow develop number year prior crisi member state wage increas signific exceed product gain turn caus unit labour cost rise substanti global financi crisi hit real economi budgetari effect automat stabilis tax benefit system fiscal stimulus packag introduc govern support provid financi sector led sharp deterior fiscal posit euro area countri extern domest imbal mount especi weaker euro area countri led sever tension financi market emerg risk advers spillov rest euro area one could divid four categori way countri could address sovereign debt problem past first natur govern pursu cours fiscal consolid second tend case countri central bank monetis public debt e financ govern debt deficit issu addit money third govern decid honour oblig simpli default outstand debt final occur except case third parti decid assum debt deficit vulner counterpart thus typic transfer resourc econom stronger weaker entiti european union legisl clear rule monetis bailout option articl treati function european union prohibit form monetari financ public debt deficit articl forbid privileg access financi institut public sector nobailout claus articl preclud one member state becom liabl liabil anoth member state articl base sound econom principl monetis would inevit lead higher inflat wellknown cost econom prosper transfer euro area member state would particular absenc far rigid fiscal rule sanction mechan european level risk creat signific moral hazard effect beneficiari countri would thus undermin longterm econom stabil euro area also ecb long warn third option restructur sovereign debt euro area exchang debt case greec remain uniqu event respect must note contagion effect measur difficult control demonstr high volatil financi market past year addit debt restructur address under econom fiscal structur imbal one way solv sovereign debt crisi euro area countri govern pursu polici strict fiscal consolid farreach structur reform address macroeconom imbal return countri sustain path growth ecb support adjust process member state best manner possibl name provid price stabil euro area whole let address measur taken ecb respons crisi turn respons euro area govern crisi ecb confront unpreced threat monetari stabil euro area broad speak come two sourc first deflationari forc stem econom downturn second impair transmiss monetari polici reflect grow tension financi market ecb react decis challeng first use standard monetari polici measur address downward pressur price stabil result sharp slowdown econom activ crisi full consist mandat reduc key polici interest rate rapid octob may word reduc polici rate faster euro area countri ever done recent histori given ecb ensur inflat expect euro area whole remain solid anchor abl maintain accommod monetari polici stanc past four year second took addit nonstandard measur ensur interest rate decis transmit effect broader economi despit volatil financi sector bank cannot easili access money market sourc financ may extend credit household compani detriment econom growth employ outset crisi ecb react immedi rapid worsen liquid condit heighten credit risk particular interbank market stress financi market reemerg autumn last year govern council ecb took seri measur enhanc provis liquid bank system activ support lend notabl introduc two longterm refinanc oper matur three year conduct decemb last year februari year except long matur oper gave bank longer horizon liquid plan also help deleverag balanc order manner medium term therebi avoid fire sale asset downscal longerterm lend time crucial crisi measur taken ecb ensur monetari stabil euro area standard nonstandard creat advers incent market particip unanchor inflationari expect reason ecb clear measur taken design temporari natur let also emphasis nonstandard measur way imping upon capac tighten monetari polici stanc respons inflationari pressur action care keep inflat expect wellanchor remain faith mandat preserv price stabil euro area medium term mandat guid continu guid monetari polici decis success ecb crisi measur maintain monetari stabil euro area let anyon believ monetari polici medicin solv under structur problem euro area last resolut crisi respons euro area govern euro area govern face three main challeng first need address intern extern macroeconom imbal second restor confid stabil european financi system third must deal remain shortcom institut design emu let elabor factor turn first rebalanc euro area economi requir first foremost public sector expenditur brought back sustain path debt overhang reduc cours particular true euro area countri current euimf programm experienc disrupt sovereign debt market much remain done forget step alreadi taken although room complac base direct estim revenu spend rather cyclic adjust primari balanc cumul fiscal consolid achiev thus far excess gdp three countri euimf programm countri regrett fallen behind target programm consolid effort signific absolut term one reason countri reach headlin deficit target found econom headwind experienc negat econom growth higher interest payment higher social secur spend led quasiautomat increas expenditur obscur fiscal consolid effort stress import implement welldesign ambiti fiscal adjust programm accompani growthenhanc structur reform doubt longterm effect fiscal consolid growth employ posit signific wherea fiscal consolid may dampen effect econom activ short run extent depend sever factor composit fiscal adjust nation author need set ambiti credibl target stick even small deviat target quick jeopardis progress made undermin confid address imbal countri also need take structur measur deal market rigid suitabl structur reform posit impact growth employ alreadi relat short term thus also help mitig negat effect consolid structur adjust nevertheless remain difficult imposs prove experi feder republ germani past year loss competit reunif boom earli effect address mean moder wage growth extend period time time german experi show welltarget structur reform strengthen potenti growth boost employ labour welfar reform contribut signific posit econom develop germani past year remain time let also briefli address two challeng face euro area govern name instabl financi market remain defici european econom govern framework bank continu strengthen balanc sheet financi system return fulfil primari task provid credit real economi said euro area govern also part sound fiscal posit across euro area contribut signific strengthen confid bank sector reli heavili govern bond safe asset use collater time euro area govern need strengthen macroprudenti framework nation european level know european system risk board develop tool identifi address potenti futur sourc system risk eu three new european supervisori author bank insur occup pension secur market strengthen focus spillov within eu financi system howev one import element framework macroprudenti supervis euro area still miss still clear mechan place deal system risk eman larg crossbord financi institut intensifi ongo work establish mechan resolut bank failur european level bring third challeng euro area govern face elimin remain institut deficit euro area govern framework european govern made consider progress front particular reinforc stabil growth pact automat less room discret applic prevent correct arm addit european fiscal compact ensur strong nation budgetari framework order facilit complianc govern oblig stabil growth pact eu member state introduc surveil mechan aim prevent correct macroeconom imbal within eu essenti new govern framework implement letter govern framework lost much credibl must care reacquir particular respons rest nation author particular european govern framework function best nation financ ministri conscienti perform role respect multilater surveil sovereign debt crisi taught us unequivoc spite nobailout claus articl treati euro area countri insul one anoth integr singl european market singl european currenc spillov effect one member state make us take strong interest pursuit sound fiscal structur polici european partner close integr european economi govern also set european crisi resolut mechan european stabil mechan purpos argu bail euro area countri fail pursu sound econom polici state purpos safeguard financi stabil one countri endang euro area whole conclud ecb polici guid price stabil consider polici target element crisi threaten prevent fulfil mandat respons resolut sovereign debt crisi rest govern euro area member state major progress made term fiscal consolid enhanc euro area govern framework yet govern need urgent implement fiscal consolid programm accompani welldesign structur reform labour product market new fiscal macroeconom rule european govern framework need implement letter crisi manag mechan euro area level need design ensur financi stabil euro area would like thank maximilian freier gianluigi ferrucci contribut prepar speech reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en