Jürgen Stark: Economic prospects and the role of monetary policy in the current situation,09-03-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,4057,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen, Since the second half of 2008, we have witnessed the deepest economic downturn since World War II and the fastest deceleration in inflation since the launch of the euro. We have confronted this situation with unprecedented decisions. Unprecedented has been the magnitude and size of interest rate cuts. Since October 2008, we have reduced key ECB interest rates by 275 basis points. Unprecedented has been the scope of liquidity support we offer to the financial system. But central banks alone are not in a position to resolve the current financial crisis. Policy makers need to prevent a further deterioration in economic and financial conditions. To this end, resolute action is needed to restructure, recapitalise and consolidate the banking system.To be realistic, the year 2009 will be a very difficult year. 2009 will be the year of adjustments in the balance sheets of banks, firms and private households. These adjustments should lay the foundations for economic conditions to eventually stabilise and improve. Let me now elaborate in greater detail on where we stand in terms of economic and monetary developments in the euro area and how this has affected the conduct of monetary policy. I will subsequently talk about how we have adjusted our refinancing operations in response to the financial crisis. Finally, I will briefly discuss challenges in the resolution of the crisis.Let me start with the economic outlook. The world economy is currently undergoing its deepest downturn since the second World War. The crisis started in summer 2007, as losses in the US sub-prime mortgage market, a relatively small segment of the US housing markets, triggered the ongoing financial turmoil. However, its impact on the global economy remained relatively limited until the summer of 2008. However, after the collapse of Lehman Brothers last September, the tensions in global financial markets escalated to a full-blown financial crisis and thereafter turned into a global economic crisis. The severe global economic downturn has now become more synchronised. The collapse in global trade has amplified the adverse impact from the financial turmoil and caused emerging market prospects to deteriorate drastically. In advanced economies, falling house prices, tumbling financial markets, collapsed household and business confidence, and the resulting need to restructure consumers’ and firms’ balance sheets have been curbing private consumption and investment. In emerging economies, nosediving global trade and the unwinding of both internal and external imbalances accrued in past years have led to a sharp decline or even negative GDP growth rates.According to most economic forecasts, the weak growth period is expected to last for some time. For example, the IMF [1] projects that the world GDP growth would decelerate to only ½ % in 2009 measured in terms of purchasing power parity and even to turn negative when measured in terms of market exchange rates. For advanced countries this means a negative annual growth rate of -2% in 2009. For emerging economies the growth is projected to remain positive, although the 3.3% growth projection is just half of the pace recorded in 2008. While it is expected that the world economy will recover in 2010, risks surrounding the outlook are on the downside as the depth and length of the global economic downturn will crucially depend on the evolution of the financial crisis. The inflation outlook has also changed significantly. Global inflationary pressures are quickly diminishing  In the short term, this is mainly due to effects from lower commodity prices, but over time, weaker labour market conditions and sluggish global demand increasingly play a role. Let me now come to the euro area. Economic activity has not been sheltered from the negative impact of the global financial crisis  We had seen already a moderation in the underlying momentum of euro area economic growth before the crisis got worse. This slowdown reflected the dampening effects from sharp increases in commodity prices before the summer 2008 and the ongoing correction in the housing market in some euro area countries. As a result of all these factors, euro area activity declined markedly in the second half of 2008. After falling moderately in the second and third quarters of 2008, euro area GDP growth contracted very sharply in the fourth quarter of the year, decreasing 1.5% quarter on quarter. This reflected not only a decrease in foreign demand for euro area exports but domestic demand was also adversely affected by domestic factors, notably very low confidence and tight financing conditions. Annual growth in 2008, at 0.8%, was the weakest rate since the early 1990s.Indicators for the first months of this year suggest a further large contraction in activity in early 2009. Consumer and business sentiment worsened further, falling to new all-time lows in February. Moreover, labour markets have deteriorated which does not bode well for consumer spending. In this context, let me stress that we in the ECB Governing Council anticipated in our interest rate decisions that there will be bad news to come for the first quarter of 2009, as we take our decisions in a forward looking manner. Once these expectations of further weakness in growth are confirmed by official data, we will not to take it into account again – there is no double counting!Looking ahead, we expect a protracted period of further weakness in euro area activity. We have to face the truth that 2009 will be a very difficult year. It will be a year of balance sheet adjustments across banks, non-financial companies and private households. This could be a further drag on investment and consumer spending, already negatively affected by very low global demand, tight financing conditions and, in the case of private consumption, a further deterioration in labour markets. However, these corrections are inevitable as they lay the foundation of the gradual recovery. This is also reflected in the March 2009 ECB staff macroeconomic projections. The expected negative or very low annual GDP growth in 2009 and 2010 somehow masks these developments as it is affected by negative carry-over effects of the previous year. Looking beyond the annual growth numbers, the underlying quarterly profile embodies expectations of increasingly positive quarterly rates of growth in real GDP over the course of 2010. Underlying this outlook is the expectation of a gradual improvement of the external environment and a normalisation in financial markets, reflecting the extensive policy measures that have been introduced to restore the functioning of the financial system, both inside and outside the euro area. This together with low inflation rates which strengthen real incomes and the strong fiscal and monetary stimulus should support the gradual recovery in euro area activity.In our view, the economic outlook remains surrounded by uncertainty. The risks to economic growth appear now to be more balanced. On the one hand, there may be stronger than anticipated positive effects, also on confidence, stemming from the extensive macroeconomic stimulus under way and reflecting other policy measures taken. On the other hand, concerns relate mainly to the potential for the turmoil in financial markets to have a stronger impact on the real economy, as well as to the emergence and intensification of protectionist pressures and to possible adverse developments in the world economy stemming from a disorderly correction of global imbalances.Let me turn to price developments. Inflation in the euro area has declined rapidly since it reached its highest level in over a decade in the summer of last year. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 1.2% in February 2009, well below the rate of 4.0% registered in July 2008. This decline primarily reflects the marked fall in global commodity prices, and in particular oil prices, over this period, owing mainly to weak global demand. The fall in commodity prices has also contributed to a significant diminishing of supply chain pressures from very high levels as signalled by strong falls in survey measures on price setting indicators of companies and substantial declines in producer prices at early production stages. Looking ahead, HICP inflation is expected to fall further in the coming months. This mainly reflects a rather technical effect which is called “base effect”. Base effects are important when looking at developments in annual inflation rates, i.e. comparing the price level now with the one registered a year ago. The increases in energy and food prices, which led to the extended inflation hump until mid-last year, will subsequently drop out of the year-on-year comparison in the coming months. These base effects will exert significant downward pressure on overall inflation and there is a high likelihood that in this process of ongoing disinflation annual HICP inflation in the euro area will temporarily turn negative in the middle of 2009. It also cannot be excluded that we will see in some euro area countries negative inflation rates for a more extended period of time. However, this will mark most probably only a trough in inflation. The same factors pushing down inflation in the first half of 2009, namely base effects related to volatile oil and food prices, will subsequently unwind and actually put upward pressure on prices, contributing to rising inflation rates over the course of the second half of 2009. Overall, the ongoing disinflation process in the euro area is expected to imply sharp fluctuations in HICP inflation rates during 2009 as also foreseen by the ECB staff projections. For 2010, the ECB staff project HICP inflation at moderate rates. Let me emphasise that sharp fluctuations in annual inflation rates or the temporary emergence of negative inflation rates is a normal concomitant of any disinflation process, which by its very nature is temporary and thus should not be confused with another “d”-word, namely deflation. From a conceptual point of view, deflation is a completely different state. A deflationary process is a persistent, broad-based and self-sustaining decline in the overall price level. It is reinforced by the anticipation that prices will decline further in the future. As a consequence, inflation expectations become unanchored and negative, with adverse effects on investment and consumption. By contrast, disinflation, which is linked to transitory movements in relative prices, is per se a welcome development because it helps sustain real incomes, provided that medium-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at levels consistent with price stability. To the extent that this is the case, short-term volatility in annual inflation rates, including negative inflation rates, is not relevant from the medium-term perspective of monetary policy. We expect that price stability is maintained at the medium-term. Moreover, available information indicates that medium-term inflation expectations in the euro area are solidly anchored at levels consistent with the aim of the Governing Council of keeping inflation at rate of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Such a firm anchoring represents the strongest and most reassuring safeguard against any risk of a downward spiral of inflation and inflation expectations. The fact that we have a clear mandate and a clear definition of price stability is helpful in anchoring inflation expectations. As in the case of growth, a considerable degree of uncertainty surrounds the inflation projections of the ECB staff. Risks to these projections are broadly balanced. They relate in particular to the risks to the outlook for economic activity as well as to risks to commodity prices  Latest money and credit data support the view that inflationary pressures have been diminishing. Broad money growth decelerated in 2008, increasingly so at the turn of the year. In particular, it brought headline M3 growth back to levels that reflect the underlying monetary dynamics, which also decelerated. The financial turmoil and its intensification in September 2008 had a substantial impact on the behaviour of market participants and affected money and credit dynamics, leading to higher volatility in money and credit aggregates. On the money side, this relates in particular to marketable instruments, but also to the significant substitution that is taking place between different categories of deposits included in M3. On the credit side, the flow of bank loans to the private sector around the turn of the year was also rather volatile, partly reflecting a possible turn-of-the year effect. But discounting this effect, latest credit developments confirms the decline in the growth of bank credit to households and firms observed during 2008.This shows how important it is to look through short-term developments when assessing the underlying pace of monetary expansion and the associated indication for risks to price stability. Let me turn to the financing conditions in the euro area which have deteriorated further since September 2008. With plummeting equity valuations and soaring credit spreads, the overall cost of financing for euro area non-financial corporations has edged upwards. At the same time, bank lending rates have declined. In fact, it seems that the substantial past reduction in the key ECB interest rates is increasingly being passed through to bank lending rates, indicating that, despite the tensions in financial markets, the transmission mechanism of monetary policy is not significantly impaired in the euro area. Let me now turn to the second part of my speech, namely the role of monetary policy in the current situation. The financial crisis has contributed to a pace in disinflation and economic deceleration which has been unprecedented. This has required us taking unprecedented decisions to contain adverse spillover effects of financial market tensions on the real economy and thereby to maintain inflation over the medium term in line with price stability. In a coordinated move, the ECB and other major central banks announced reductions in their policy interest rates on 8 October 2008. Overall, since October 2008, we lowered the key ECB interest rates by 275 basis points. The overnight money market rates fell even more steeply over this period, as the ECB significantly enlarged its liquidity provision to euro area banks. Since October last year we have provided the banking sector with unlimited funds at maturities up to six months, against an expanded range of eligible collateral. These decisions have been taken in a timely and decisive manner, in a context characterised by an exceptionally high level of uncertainty. To better understand the scale of our interventions in the interbank money market, one needs to appreciate its importance in the implementation and transmission of monetary policy. Money market interest rates, especially of short maturities mark the starting point in the transmission of monetary policy. They determine the marginal costs of refinancing of the banking sector and thereby act through the bank lending channel. Money market interest rates are a key factor in determining the entire yield curve and thereby are crucial for the expectations channel of monetary transmission. Of course, longer-term interest rates and bank lending rates cannot be directly controlled by the central bank, but expectations of short-term money market rates are key in determining them.Contributing to the functioning of the money market and preventing a liquidity crunch therefore has been crucial to forestall a breakdown of the transmission of monetary policy and a systemic crisis. As a consequence of our measures, the Eurosystem’s consolidated balance sheet has grown by two thirds from summer 2007 until most recently, or by 6% of euro area nominal GDP. To put these numbers into perspective, the size of our balance sheet has grown from 13% of euro area nominal GDP in 2007 to over 20% most recently. By providing unlimited funds in our refinancing operations we have ensured that banks facing difficulties raising funds in the market are always able to fulfil their liquidity needs. But we need to be realistic about what we, as a central bank, can achieve. In my view, we cannot expect to see the money market functioning the way it did before August 2007. What is certainly encouraging is that recently the volumes allotted in our refinancing operations have come down slightly. The same is true for the number of banks participating in these operations. Spreads between secured and unsecured interest rates at term maturity have gone down somewhat. But they have remained high. The turnover in unsecured interbank lending, especially at longer maturities, still remains low. To be clear: The problem is not a lack of liquidity in the market. It is the lack of trust among the banks themselves. Unless trust in the solvency of banks is re-established, there is hardly any chance that conditions in the money market will normalise. As already mentioned, financing conditions have not eased exactly in line with key ECB interest rates. So will key ECB interest rates have to be cut to even lower levels? In principle, even after last Thursday’s decision the ECB could still contribute to easing credit conditions by cutting its key interest rates further. But this will not fundamentally solve the problems that have caused the financial crisis. The contrary could be the case. If maintained for an extended period of time, too low or very low interest rates might in fact aggravate them. They have the potential to weaken the incentives for banks to clean up their balance sheet of troubled assets and monitor their credit risk carefully. This in turn may reinforce the very problems that currently impair the functioning of the financial system. Too low interest rates tend to foster lending to unprofitable business. This would harm the growth potential of the economy and thereby prepare the ground for anaemic growth. Or, as in the past, it could lay the foundations for another asset price bubble. Finally, very low interest rates hamper the functioning of the money market: The lower interest rates in the money market, the lower the incentive of banks to trade funds in the market rather than depositing them safely, at the same low return, with the central bank. So, as we have started to operate at very low interest rates, are we running out of ammunition to ease monetary conditions further if warranted? Do we need to take more non-standard measures?Let me emphasise that what we have implemented so far has already been rather unconventional. But in considering any additional action to improve the functioning of the financial system and transmission of monetary policy we need to be mindful of our responsibilities and our mandate – i.e. to be conscious of what monetary policy can do and, even more importantly, what it cannot, and consequently should not do. Central bank measures aimed at easing credit conditions have not been met with undivided enthusiasm. Commentators have worried about a host of issues. Will the expansion of central bank balance sheets ultimately lead to inflation? As central banks are seen as switching attention from implementing monetary policy by steering short-term interest rates to targeting the composition and size of their balance sheets, have they lost their instrument? Have they become intransparent and unpredictable? With the measures put in place, how are central banks going to preserve their financial and political independence which has been so hard to earn? Under what conditions and when are central banks going to unwind these measures? I can assure you, we have not lost sight of the principles that have successfully guided us in the past. The measures that we have taken and any additional measures we might implement remain strictly consistent with our responsibilities. Accordingly they meet a whole range of criteria and they will continue to do so.Any additional measures need to be consistent with our mandate and our principles. Consequently, they can only be taken with the view to pursue price stability and to contribute to the preservation of financial stability. Pursuant to this objective and the Treaty requirements the measures must be compliant with the prohibition of monetary financing. In addition, the scope of such measures is limited by the need to contain the Eurosystems risk exposure so as to safeguard its financial independence, as otherwise the ECB will end up jeopardising its credibility. Furthermore, as conditions in the financial system will eventually improve and in line with our assessment of risks to price stability these measures will be unwound. Accordingly, and finally, bearing also in mind that the health of the financial system cannot be made the ECB’s responsibility, one needs to be careful not to blur the responsibility of monetary and fiscal authorities in the euro area.Of course, we will do whatever we judge to be necessary and appropriate to maintain price stability and contribute to the preservation of financial stability. But we will strictly adhere to these principles.In considering further easing measures, these principles have obvious implications. Central banks can alleviate liquidity risks. But they cannot address the perceived solvency problems that impair the financial system. One could conceive measures to ease credit conditions by taking over some of the credit risk on commercial paper that banks currently hold. The ECB has already been accepting corporate loans as part of collateral in its regular liquidity operations. By operating through the banking sector, this has significantly contributed to providing funding to non-financial corporations – and thereby an easing of credit conditions. Buying corporate debt outright would circumvent the banking sector. We have a responsibility to keep the Eurosystem financially sound. This concern puts a break on how much further we can expand our balance sheet. Clearly, the challenges for resolving the current crisis remain tremendous. There is no panacea. We have made our contribution by making sure that longer-term inflation expectations have remained anchored in line with price stability and by preventing a liquidity crunch. It remains our responsibility to continue to do so. But one cannot rely solely on central bank policies to address all the consequences of the financial crisis and its fall-out on the economy. Resolute action is needed to restructure, consolidate and recapitalise the banking system. Specifically, action is needed to help banks support their balance sheet so as to sustain an adequate flow of credit to the non-financial sector. Since last autumn, governments have provided or pledged a substantial amount in guarantees for new debt issuance by banks. In addition, they have recapitalised a number of financial institutions. The commitments to provide support are already substantial. But it will take time for the measures to be completely implemented and to show their full effects. In case these measures prove to be insufficient, they need to be complemented by further actions to address problems on the asset side of banks’ balance sheets. To be successful in resolving the financial crisis the asset support schemes need to meet a whole range of objectives. From the central bank perspective the overwhelming objective is to safeguard financial stability and restore the flow of credit from banks to the private sector. In addition, the measures taken will need to be implemented in a way so as to maintain a level playing field in the EU financial market and minimising the burden to public finances. In line with these objectives, the Eurosystem has issued a set of guiding principles for the design and implementation of asset support schemes to address the most critical issues. Apart from guidance on the types of assets and institutions that would be eligible to support, these guiding principles call for an adequate degree of risk sharing as a necessary element to limit the cost to the government, to provide the right incentives to the participating institutions and to maintain a level playing field across these institutions. They also mention that schemes with well-defined exit strategies should be favoured and that conditionality may be attached to such schemes.Let me conclude. We face unprecedented challenges. At the ECB we have demonstrated a willingness and capacity to react rapidly to exceptional circumstances. We have cut interest rates sharply to forestall the emergence of downside risks to price stability. We have provided unlimited liquidity support to the banking system so as ensure that liquidity risk does not lead to a systemic crisis. But, ultimately, we alone as central bankers cannot resolve the current financial crisis. The onus is now on governments, supervisory and regulatory authorities, and the financial industry itself, to cooperate to act resolutely to restructure, recapitalise and consolidate the banking system. Such government measures are under way. On our side we will continue to do whatever we judge to be necessary and appropriate to maintain price stability and contribute to financial stability. And in doing so we will stick to the principles that have served us well in the pursuit of price stability. We will safeguard our financial independence. We will be transparent and accountable for our actions. Most importantly, we will remain faithful to our mandate and provide an anchor of confidence and stability in difficult times. [1] IMF WEO Update, 28 January 2009.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen sinc second half wit deepest econom downturn sinc world war ii fastest deceler inflat sinc launch euro confront situat unpreced decis unpreced magnitud size interest rate cut sinc octob reduc key ecb interest rate basi point unpreced scope liquid support offer financi system central bank alon posit resolv current financi crisi polici maker need prevent deterior econom financi condit end resolut action need restructur recapitalis consolid bank system realist year difficult year year adjust balanc sheet bank firm privat household adjust lay foundat econom condit eventu stabilis improv let elabor greater detail stand term econom monetari develop euro area affect conduct monetari polici subsequ talk adjust refinanc oper respons financi crisi final briefli discuss challeng resolut crisi let start econom outlook world economi current undergo deepest downturn sinc second world war crisi start summer loss us subprim mortgag market relat small segment us hous market trigger ongo financi turmoil howev impact global economi remain relat limit summer howev collaps lehman brother last septemb tension global financi market escal fullblown financi crisi thereaft turn global econom crisi sever global econom downturn becom synchronis collaps global trade amplifi advers impact financi turmoil caus emerg market prospect deterior drastic advanc economi fall hous price tumbl financi market collaps household busi confid result need restructur consum firm balanc sheet curb privat consumpt invest emerg economi nosediv global trade unwind intern extern imbal accru past year led sharp declin even negat gdp growth rate accord econom forecast weak growth period expect last time exampl imf project world gdp growth would deceler ½ measur term purchas power pariti even turn negat measur term market exchang rate advanc countri mean negat annual growth rate emerg economi growth project remain posit although growth project half pace record expect world economi recov risk surround outlook downsid depth length global econom downturn crucial depend evolut financi crisi inflat outlook also chang signific global inflationari pressur quick diminish short term main due effect lower commod price time weaker labour market condit sluggish global demand increas play role let come euro area econom activ shelter negat impact global financi crisi seen alreadi moder under momentum euro area econom growth crisi got wors slowdown reflect dampen effect sharp increas commod price summer ongo correct hous market euro area countri result factor euro area activ declin mark second half fall moder second third quarter euro area gdp growth contract sharpli fourth quarter year decreas quarter quarter reflect decreas foreign demand euro area export domest demand also advers affect domest factor notabl low confid tight financ condit annual growth weakest rate sinc earli indic first month year suggest larg contract activ earli consum busi sentiment worsen fall new alltim low februari moreov labour market deterior bode well consum spend context let stress ecb govern council anticip interest rate decis bad news come first quarter take decis forward look manner expect weak growth confirm offici data take account doubl count look ahead expect protract period weak euro area activ face truth difficult year year balanc sheet adjust across bank nonfinanci compani privat household could drag invest consum spend alreadi negat affect low global demand tight financ condit case privat consumpt deterior labour market howev correct inevit lay foundat gradual recoveri also reflect march ecb staff macroeconom project expect negat low annual gdp growth somehow mask develop affect negat carryov effect previous year look beyond annual growth number under quarter profil embodi expect increas posit quarter rate growth real gdp cours under outlook expect gradual improv extern environ normalis financi market reflect extens polici measur introduc restor function financi system insid outsid euro area togeth low inflat rate strengthen real incom strong fiscal monetari stimulus support gradual recoveri euro area activ view econom outlook remain surround uncertainti risk econom growth appear balanc one hand may stronger anticip posit effect also confid stem extens macroeconom stimulus way reflect polici measur taken hand concern relat main potenti turmoil financi market stronger impact real economi well emerg intensif protectionist pressur possibl advers develop world economi stem disord correct global imbal let turn price develop inflat euro area declin rapid sinc reach highest level decad summer last year accord eurostat flash estim euro area annual hicp inflat februari well rate regist juli declin primarili reflect mark fall global commod price particular oil price period owe main weak global demand fall commod price also contribut signific diminish suppli chain pressur high level signal strong fall survey measur price set indic compani substanti declin produc price earli product stage look ahead hicp inflat expect fall come month main reflect rather technic effect call base effect base effect import look develop annual inflat rate e compar price level one regist year ago increas energi food price led extend inflat hump midlast year subsequ drop yearonyear comparison come month base effect exert signific downward pressur overal inflat high likelihood process ongo disinfl annual hicp inflat euro area temporarili turn negat middl also cannot exclud see euro area countri negat inflat rate extend period time howev mark probabl trough inflat factor push inflat first half name base effect relat volatil oil food price subsequ unwind actual put upward pressur price contribut rise inflat rate cours second half overal ongo disinfl process euro area expect impli sharp fluctuat hicp inflat rate also foreseen ecb staff project ecb staff project hicp inflat moder rate let emphasis sharp fluctuat annual inflat rate temporari emerg negat inflat rate normal concomit disinfl process natur temporari thus confus anoth d word name deflat conceptu point view deflat complet differ state deflationari process persist broadbas selfsustain declin overal price level reinforc anticip price declin futur consequ inflat expect becom unanchor negat advers effect invest consumpt contrast disinfl link transitori movement relat price per se welcom develop help sustain real incom provid mediumterm inflat expect remain well anchor level consist price stabil extent case shortterm volatil annual inflat rate includ negat inflat rate relev mediumterm perspect monetari polici expect price stabil maintain mediumterm moreov avail inform indic mediumterm inflat expect euro area solid anchor level consist aim govern council keep inflat rate close medium term firm anchor repres strongest reassur safeguard risk downward spiral inflat inflat expect fact clear mandat clear definit price stabil help anchor inflat expect case growth consider degre uncertainti surround inflat project ecb staff risk project broad balanc relat particular risk outlook econom activ well risk commod price latest money credit data support view inflationari pressur diminish broad money growth deceler increas turn year particular brought headlin m growth back level reflect under monetari dynam also deceler financi turmoil intensif septemb substanti impact behaviour market particip affect money credit dynam lead higher volatil money credit aggreg money side relat particular market instrument also signific substitut take place differ categori deposit includ m credit side flow bank loan privat sector around turn year also rather volatil part reflect possibl turnofth year effect discount effect latest credit develop confirm declin growth bank credit household firm observ show import look shortterm develop assess under pace monetari expans associ indic risk price stabil let turn financ condit euro area deterior sinc septemb plummet equiti valuat soar credit spread overal cost financ euro area nonfinanci corpor edg upward time bank lend rate declin fact seem substanti past reduct key ecb interest rate increas pass bank lend rate indic despit tension financi market transmiss mechan monetari polici signific impair euro area let turn second part speech name role monetari polici current situat financi crisi contribut pace disinfl econom deceler unpreced requir us take unpreced decis contain advers spillov effect financi market tension real economi therebi maintain inflat medium term line price stabil coordin move ecb major central bank announc reduct polici interest rate octob overal sinc octob lower key ecb interest rate basi point overnight money market rate fell even steepli period ecb signific enlarg liquid provis euro area bank sinc octob last year provid bank sector unlimit fund matur six month expand rang elig collater decis taken time decis manner context characteris except high level uncertainti better understand scale intervent interbank money market one need appreci import implement transmiss monetari polici money market interest rate especi short matur mark start point transmiss monetari polici determin margin cost refinanc bank sector therebi act bank lend channel money market interest rate key factor determin entir yield curv therebi crucial expect channel monetari transmiss cours longerterm interest rate bank lend rate cannot direct control central bank expect shortterm money market rate key determin contribut function money market prevent liquid crunch therefor crucial forestal breakdown transmiss monetari polici system crisi consequ measur eurosystem consolid balanc sheet grown two third summer recent euro area nomin gdp put number perspect size balanc sheet grown euro area nomin gdp recent provid unlimit fund refinanc oper ensur bank face difficulti rais fund market alway abl fulfil liquid need need realist central bank achiev view cannot expect see money market function way august certain encourag recent volum allot refinanc oper come slight true number bank particip oper spread secur unsecur interest rate term matur gone somewhat remain high turnov unsecur interbank lend especi longer matur still remain low clear problem lack liquid market lack trust among bank unless trust solvenc bank reestablish hard chanc condit money market normalis alreadi mention financ condit eas exact line key ecb interest rate key ecb interest rate cut even lower level principl even last thursday decis ecb could still contribut eas credit condit cut key interest rate fundament solv problem caus financi crisi contrari could case maintain extend period time low low interest rate might fact aggrav potenti weaken incent bank clean balanc sheet troubl asset monitor credit risk care turn may reinforc problem current impair function financi system low interest rate tend foster lend unprofit busi would harm growth potenti economi therebi prepar ground anaem growth past could lay foundat anoth asset price bubbl final low interest rate hamper function money market lower interest rate money market lower incent bank trade fund market rather deposit safe low return central bank start oper low interest rate run ammunit eas monetari condit warrant need take nonstandard measur let emphasis implement far alreadi rather unconvent consid addit action improv function financi system transmiss monetari polici need mind respons mandat e conscious monetari polici even import cannot consequ central bank measur aim eas credit condit met undivid enthusiasm comment worri host issu expans central bank balanc sheet ultim lead inflat central bank seen switch attent implement monetari polici steer shortterm interest rate target composit size balanc sheet lost instrument becom intranspar unpredict measur put place central bank go preserv financi polit independ hard earn condit central bank go unwind measur assur lost sight principl success guid us past measur taken addit measur might implement remain strict consist respons accord meet whole rang criteria continu addit measur need consist mandat principl consequ taken view pursu price stabil contribut preserv financi stabil pursuant object treati requir measur must compliant prohibit monetari financ addit scope measur limit need contain eurosystem risk exposur safeguard financi independ otherwis ecb end jeopardis credibl furthermor condit financi system eventu improv line assess risk price stabil measur unwound accord final bear also mind health financi system cannot made ecb respons one need care blur respons monetari fiscal author euro area cours whatev judg necessari appropri maintain price stabil contribut preserv financi stabil strict adher principl consid eas measur principl obvious implic central bank allevi liquid risk cannot address perceiv solvenc problem impair financi system one could conceiv measur eas credit condit take credit risk commerci paper bank current hold ecb alreadi accept corpor loan part collater regular liquid oper oper bank sector signific contribut provid fund nonfinanci corpor therebi eas credit condit buy corpor debt outright would circumv bank sector respons keep eurosystem financi sound concern put break much expand balanc sheet clear challeng resolv current crisi remain tremend panacea made contribut make sure longerterm inflat expect remain anchor line price stabil prevent liquid crunch remain respons continu one cannot reli sole central bank polici address consequ financi crisi fallout economi resolut action need restructur consolid recapitalis bank system specif action need help bank support balanc sheet sustain adequ flow credit nonfinanci sector sinc last autumn govern provid pledg substanti amount guarante new debt issuanc bank addit recapitalis number financi institut commit provid support alreadi substanti take time measur complet implement show full effect case measur prove insuffici need complement action address problem asset side bank balanc sheet success resolv financi crisi asset support scheme need meet whole rang object central bank perspect overwhelm object safeguard financi stabil restor flow credit bank privat sector addit measur taken need implement way maintain level play field eu financi market minimis burden public financ line object eurosystem issu set guid principl design implement asset support scheme address critic issu apart guidanc type asset institut would elig support guid principl call adequ degre risk share necessari element limit cost govern provid right incent particip institut maintain level play field across institut also mention scheme welldefin exit strategi favour condit may attach scheme let conclud face unpreced challeng ecb demonstr willing capac react rapid except circumst cut interest rate sharpli forestal emerg downsid risk price stabil provid unlimit liquid support bank system ensur liquid risk lead system crisi ultim alon central banker cannot resolv current financi crisi onus govern supervisori regulatori author financi industri cooper act resolut restructur recapitalis consolid bank system govern measur way side continu whatev judg necessari appropri maintain price stabil contribut financi stabil stick principl serv us well pursuit price stabil safeguard financi independ transpar account action import remain faith mandat provid anchor confid stabil difficult time imf weo updat januari reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en