Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament,03-03-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,1861,"<p>Madame Chair,Honourable Members,This is my last hearing in ECON before the end of this legislature. I would like to first of all thank you, Sharon, for the way you have guided this committee throughout a challenging period. Let me also thank all of you for the frank and fruitful exchanges we have had in the last two-and-a-half years. It has been an invaluable experience for me. In these difficult crisis times, discharging accountability in front of an assembly with a true European perspective has been helpful for the public acceptance of our actions. Moreover, the hearings have always been a welcome occasion to discuss the state of Economic and Monetary Union between two genuinely European institutions and to debate about what is the right way forward. I am very much looking forward to continuing this approach with the new ECON committee from July onwards.I would like to take the opportunity of this last hearing to take stock of the monetary policy that the ECB has conducted over the last five years and to review what has been achieved in the euro area over the course of these years. Let me then also offer our assessment of the challenges that lie ahead and that will await the new Parliament and the new Commission.Before I start to go into detail in these three areas, let me however remind you that the next meeting of the ECB Governing Council takes place on Thursday. In view of the so-called purdah period, you will understand that I will not be able to give detailed answers on our monetary policy stance today.In the last five years, the ECB has continued to take the necessary measures with a view to maintaining price stability in the euro area. Let me turn back to the first hearing of this Parliament’s term which took place with my predecessor in September 2009. At the time, the economy was just bottoming out in the aftermath of the great contraction which had ensued after Lehman’s failure. We were witnessing negative inflation rates. In this environment, the outlook was seen to be broadly in line with price stability. Inflation was projected to increase toward levels close to 2%. The key ECB interest rates were kept on hold at the very low level to which they had been brought in several stages since the autumn of the preceding year. Some phasing-out of non-standard measures was announced. However, in May 2010, sovereign debt markets froze in various euro area Member States. Financial fragmentation took a new and unfamiliar form, with financial conditions and the transmission of our monetary policy varying to a great extent across Member States. We responded by introducing the Securities Markets Programme, focused on purchases of government bonds. Initially, while the economic impact of the sovereign debt crisis was limited and largely confined to vulnerable economies, the rapid global recovery put upside pressure on energy prices. This drove up inflation also in the euro area. We decided to raise interest rates in early 2011 given upside risks to the medium term inflation outlook stemming from energy prices and from ample monetary liquidity. However, the sovereign debt crisis deepened and the euro area entered a second recession. The inflationary pressures that had emerged before receded. Therefore, we lowered interest rates in a series of steps. Stress in sovereign debt markets quickly undermined the wholesale funding conditions of banks based in those Member States. To forestall a credit crunch, we introduced refinancing operations with maturities of up to three years, in a context of full liquidity allotment at a fixed rate. As the mutual exposures of banks and their sovereigns fed an adverse, self-reinforcing confidence crisis, investors started to fear that public and private liabilities issued in certain Member States would not be redeemed in our common currency. A significant redenomination risk arose. As you know, the integrity of the euro area is an absolute precondition for us to be able to deliver on the mandate prescribed by the Treaty and in particular to ensure a smooth transmission of our monetary policy. In order to preserve this integrity, we thus announced our readiness to conduct Outright Monetary Transactions with the specific purpose of removing compensation for that risk from the financial pricing of securities. This announcement reversed the destabilising capital flows that redenomination fears had encouraged in spring 2012. While financial markets had been on a steady course toward normalisation for some months, in late spring and summer of 2013 the euro area money market – not unlike elsewhere in the global financial system – became subject to external shocks. We noted a sustained increase in expected interest rates. This was unwarranted in view of our underlying macroeconomic conditions, and was not in line with the Governing Council’s policy intentions. In July last year we therefore clarified the orientation of monetary policy going forward: we offered forward guidance on the future path of policy conditional on the evolving outlook for price stability. All our measures, standard and non-standard, have been taken to serve our primary objective of maintaining price stability. And they have delivered: since June 2009 (i.e. the start of this legislature) the average inflation rate in the euro area has been 1.8%. In exceptional circumstances, our measures were exceptional. But our commitment to our primary objective has not changed, and our strategy has remained the guide of our action. Our credible commitment to these core elements is reflected in medium to longer-term inflation expectations remaining firmly anchored in line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.The last five years have not only seen effective monetary policy-making in the euro area – we should also remind ourselves that much has been achieved in the field of economic policy-making.Four years after the first Member States requested financial assistance, today we can safely say that the worst has been averted. The political will of all actors involved has been strong enough to defend the integrity of the euro area. Many had underestimated this will. And more than that: Contrary to the bleak picture that some are trying to paint these days, the euro area is – in terms of economic fundamentals and institutional set-up – on a better footing than it was at the beginning of this Parliament’s mandate. It is clearly moving in the right direction – the glass is at least half-full. To a large extent, this can be attributed to the correction of economic policies at the national level. Imbalances are receding and foundations are being laid for improved competitiveness and stronger growth. This is especially true for programme countries, which have undertaken a remarkable effort to consolidate public balance sheets, repair their financial sectors and reform the structure of their economies. Beyond national policies, the euro area as a whole has become more resilient. In these turbulent years, when the return to national remedies often looked tempting, the European Parliament with its true European perspective played a crucial role in ensuring truly European solutions. I am aware that the institutional approach that had to be taken at some instances has created some discomfort especially within your house. But overall, let us recognise what has been achieved:First, the six-pack, the two-pack and the Fiscal Compact have made the governance framework more commensurate to the challenges of a monetary union. This was an important step towards sound public finances in the euro area. Second, improved financial regulation (as exemplified by CRD IV and by the compromise reached on the BRRD) and the gradual steps towards a true banking union (with a single supervisor, a single resolution mechanism and a harmonised framework for national deposit guarantee schemes) will importantly reduce the risk that a crisis of the magnitude that we have just experienced will materialise again. Third, in 2010, there had been no arrangements in place to deal with Member States losing market access. This absence had created major uncertainty in markets about the way forward. With the ESM and the two-pack, both a permanent funding instrument and a governance framework have been created. This has been a major step forward and will ensure that in the future, the euro area will be better prepared to respond to such crises. In historic perspective, five years are a blink of an eye. In less than five years, the euro area has taken a remarkable leap forward that has kept us together. This cannot be highlighted enough in the weeks to come.I have no doubt that from July on the next parliament will continue to assume the important role this house has played in the last legislature. The challenges that still lie ahead of us are too important and too complex to indulge in complacency. It is too early to claim “mission accomplished”.People in the euro area are still suffering from the inevitable adjustment process following years of accumulated imbalances. Unemployment remains unacceptably high. Citizens are judging Europe on its capacity to deliver jobs and sustainable growth. The years to come are about creating a more perfect union that caters to these objectives.Foremost, this means delivering on commitments made in the past. Member States need to keep their promises to correct imbalances and to reform the structure of their economies. Fiscal policies have to be brought in line with the provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact and of the Fiscal Compact. Fiscal consolidation should be designed in a growth friendly manner while structural reforms will boost potential growth.This concerns all Member States, not just those who looked at some point into the abyss of losing market access. This concerns also the European institutions. They have to ensure that common rules are thoroughly and evenly applied.Delivering on past commitments also means keeping the promise made by Heads of States or Governments in June 2012 to complete banking union. It means swift transposition of agreed directives into national law and a stringent application of the adopted regulatory framework. It also means that a strong second pillar of banking union, a Single Resolution Mechanism, needs to be agreed before the end of this legislature.Creating a more perfect union also requires filling the remaining gaps in the architecture of Economic and Monetary Union. A genuine and comprehensive Economic and Monetary Union as outlined in the Four Presidents Report should still remain our long-term objective. This does not mean pushing integration as far as we can. This is neither economically necessary nor politically realistic. It means aligning economic governance and policies of Member States where appropriate to ensure that positive spillovers are enforced while negative externalities are minimised. Sharing sovereignty in crucial policy areas is certainly one way to accomplish this.It is not for a central bank to prescribe solutions. This is a political prerogative. But it is my hope both as a central banker and as a European citizen that the upcoming electoral campaign will serve as an opportunity to engage in a debate on solutions for Europe’s common way forward.Thank you for your attention. I am now looking forward to your questions.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",madam chair honour member last hear econ end legislatur would like first thank sharon way guid committe throughout challeng period let also thank frank fruit exchang last twoandahalf year invalu experi difficult crisi time discharg account front assembl true european perspect help public accept action moreov hear alway welcom occas discuss state econom monetari union two genuin european institut debat right way forward much look forward continu approach new econ committe juli onward would like take opportun last hear take stock monetari polici ecb conduct last five year review achiev euro area cours year let also offer assess challeng lie ahead await new parliament new commiss start go detail three area let howev remind next meet ecb govern council take place thursday view socal purdah period understand abl give detail answer monetari polici stanc today last five year ecb continu take necessari measur view maintain price stabil euro area let turn back first hear parliament term took place predecessor septemb time economi bottom aftermath great contract ensu lehman failur wit negat inflat rate environ outlook seen broad line price stabil inflat project increas toward level close key ecb interest rate kept hold low level brought sever stage sinc autumn preced year phasingout nonstandard measur announc howev may sovereign debt market froze various euro area member state financi fragment took new unfamiliar form financi condit transmiss monetari polici vari great extent across member state respond introduc secur market programm focus purchas govern bond initi econom impact sovereign debt crisi limit larg confin vulner economi rapid global recoveri put upsid pressur energi price drove inflat also euro area decid rais interest rate earli given upsid risk medium term inflat outlook stem energi price ampl monetari liquid howev sovereign debt crisi deepen euro area enter second recess inflationari pressur emerg reced therefor lower interest rate seri step stress sovereign debt market quick undermin wholesal fund condit bank base member state forestal credit crunch introduc refinanc oper matur three year context full liquid allot fix rate mutual exposur bank sovereign fed advers selfreinforc confid crisi investor start fear public privat liabil issu certain member state would redeem common currenc signific redenomin risk aros know integr euro area absolut precondit us abl deliv mandat prescrib treati particular ensur smooth transmiss monetari polici order preserv integr thus announc readi conduct outright monetari transact specif purpos remov compens risk financi price secur announc revers destabilis capit flow redenomin fear encourag spring financi market steadi cours toward normalis month late spring summer euro area money market unlik elsewher global financi system becam subject extern shock note sustain increas expect interest rate unwarr view under macroeconom condit line govern council polici intent juli last year therefor clarifi orient monetari polici go forward offer forward guidanc futur path polici condit evolv outlook price stabil measur standard nonstandard taken serv primari object maintain price stabil deliv sinc june e start legislatur averag inflat rate euro area except circumst measur except commit primari object chang strategi remain guid action credibl commit core element reflect medium longerterm inflat expect remain firm anchor line govern council aim keep inflat rate close medium term last five year seen effect monetari policymak euro area also remind much achiev field econom policymak four year first member state request financi assist today safe say worst avert polit actor involv strong enough defend integr euro area mani underestim contrari bleak pictur tri paint day euro area term econom fundament institut setup better foot begin parliament mandat clear move right direct glass least halfful larg extent attribut correct econom polici nation level imbal reced foundat laid improv competit stronger growth especi true programm countri undertaken remark effort consolid public balanc sheet repair financi sector reform structur economi beyond nation polici euro area whole becom resili turbul year return nation remedi often look tempt european parliament true european perspect play crucial role ensur truli european solut awar institut approach taken instanc creat discomfort especi within hous overal let us recognis achiev first sixpack twopack fiscal compact made govern framework commensur challeng monetari union import step toward sound public financ euro area second improv financi regul exemplifi crd iv compromis reach brrd gradual step toward true bank union singl supervisor singl resolut mechan harmonis framework nation deposit guarante scheme import reduc risk crisi magnitud experienc materialis third arrang place deal member state lose market access absenc creat major uncertainti market way forward esm twopack perman fund instrument govern framework creat major step forward ensur futur euro area better prepar respond crise histor perspect five year blink eye less five year euro area taken remark leap forward kept us togeth cannot highlight enough week come doubt juli next parliament continu assum import role hous play last legislatur challeng still lie ahead us import complex indulg complac earli claim mission accomplish peopl euro area still suffer inevit adjust process follow year accumul imbal unemploy remain unaccept high citizen judg europ capac deliv job sustain growth year come creat perfect union cater object foremost mean deliv commit made past member state need keep promis correct imbal reform structur economi fiscal polici brought line provis stabil growth pact fiscal compact fiscal consolid design growth friend manner structur reform boost potenti growth concern member state look point abyss lose market access concern also european institut ensur common rule thorough even appli deliv past commit also mean keep promis made head state govern june complet bank union mean swift transposit agre direct nation law stringent applic adopt regulatori framework also mean strong second pillar bank union singl resolut mechan need agre end legislatur creat perfect union also requir fill remain gap architectur econom monetari union genuin comprehens econom monetari union outlin four presid report still remain longterm object mean push integr far neither econom necessari polit realist mean align econom govern polici member state appropri ensur posit spillov enforc negat extern minimis share sovereignti crucial polici area certain one way accomplish central bank prescrib solut polit prerog hope central banker european citizen upcom elector campaign serv opportun engag debat solut europ common way forward thank attent look forward question reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en