Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Modernising payments: 'no pain – no gain',03-05-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,3218,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,It is a great pleasure for me to be here with you and to present some thoughts on the very relevant topic of this conference, namely the role of non-banks in the payments field. “Modernising payments: no pain – no gain” was the title that I gave Stuart Weiner and his colleagues a couple of months ago for my luncheon address, because I felt that this title would capture nicely the essence of the modernisation process in payments. Innovation and modernisation rarely occur without pressure from competition. For example, if one player in the market has developed a method to offer its services or products in a cheaper or better way, other players will need to adapt in order not to lose out against the innovating competitor. Often the entry of new market players from outside upsets an existing balance among the current incumbents and radically changes a sector. Of course, network industries, like payments, have their specific characteristics and cannot be likened exactly to our textbook model of market competition. However, the close link between innovation and competition still holds, and the benefits and advantages for one market player are often the costs and disadvantages for another. Joseph A. Schumpeter, the 20th Century Harvard economist who has his roots in my home country, Austria, described the process of economic modernisation as “creative destruction”, whereby existing and well-established products and procedures are destroyed and replaced by newer and better ones. In short: “no pain – no gain”. Just last week, when I was preparing for this speech, I learnt that the title I have chosen is also the name of a movie that came out two years ago. The movie, “No Pain, No Gain”, was not unsuccessful here in the USA, winning some awards at film festivals. [1] It is about a small-town champion bodybuilder from Ohio who travels to Los Angeles in order to train so that he can beat his arch rival. His mission is to prove that natural science and hard work can triumph over steroid use. A review in the “Ironman” magazine praises the film as “a great movie that every bodybuilder and fan of sport should see”. Upon reading about this film and its title, I sought reassurance from my American friends that my audience today would most likely not know this film and that the title of my speech would therefore not give rise to the wrong kind of expectations. That said, I think that the image of bodybuilding is not completely off the mark. It seems to me that there is certainly some muscle-flexing going on in the payments field at the moment with non-banks and cross-border competition putting pressure on existing service structures and processes. In my speech, I would like to focus on innovation in retail payments and, in particular, on three issues: first, what drives payment innovation, particularly in Europe; second, the challenges for those involved in the payments process; and finally, possible risks and the role of central banks.Changing things by being innovative quite often involves experiencing short-term pain in return for long-term benefit. This is especially the case in the field of payments systems. The upfront costs involved in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of services is often a distraction from the long-term benefits, which can be uncertain. Traditionally, in the field of retail payments, the essential functions performed by the payment services industry and the market participants that comprised it remained relatively constant for decades. Nevertheless, huge investments were made to improve the processes and infrastructures, but these have remained fragmented by national borders in Europe. Currently, the payment industry is in the midst of a period of rapid change and transformation. Political and regulatory initiatives, intensified international competition, rapid innovations in new payment services and the explosive growth in information technology possibilities are key drivers of this change. Moreover, customers in today’s high-tech era have started to voice their demands and expectations for electronic services that reflect up-do-date technological capabilities.In Europe, we actively welcome payment innovation and seek to create regulatory conditions that are conducive to modernisation. The most notable example, although not the only one, is the market-driven initiative to establish a Single Euro Payments Area ( SEPA). Eight years after the introduction of the euro, payment services are still largely organised within national borders. The SEPA project seeks to change this by providing common technical and commercial standards for the banking industry in Europe. The SEPA project is a key driver for innovation as it will eliminate the differences between national and cross-border payments. When I was here in Santa Fe two years ago I could tell you about our vision – today I can report that it is happening: simpler and cheaper cross-border payments are on their way. I am confident that the SEPA will also stimulate a more intensive use of electronic payment instruments. Research indicates that different levels of competitiveness exist in the individual countries in Europe. Historically, they have had differing cost and revenue drivers based largely on national payment channels and traditional usage of payment instruments, so that their starting points for moving forward in a SEPA environment also differ. However, the combination of the forthcoming SEPA with the general appetite in society for innovative technologies should lead to excellent opportunities for all market participants to realise innovative retail payment solutions. The SEPA will be underpinned by a robust legal framework drawn up by the European authorities in the form of the Payment Services Directive ( PSD). One week ago, the European Union (EU) legislature reached a consensus on the PSD. By harmonising the national legal frameworks, the Directive will greatly facilitate the implementation of SEPA instruments for the banking industry. Furthermore, the PSD creates a new phenomenon: the “payment institution”. Once the sole domain of banking institutions, non-bank competitors have now entered the payments market and will henceforth have a clear regulatory framework, namely for licensing and supervision. This increased competition, along with changes in technology, will fuel the need to innovate new payment products, services and infrastructures, providing major benefits to the wider economy. The message from Europe is quite clear. The groundwork and conditions for a single payments market in the euro area have been prepared. The EU takes a positive and proactive stance towards innovation regardless of the diverse practices in the different regions and irrespective of the nature of the institutions involved. Notwithstanding the differing starting points, the SEPA and PSD initiatives will act as a catalyst to promote increased choice and competition, greater innovation and more transparency in both pricing and the services available to customers. These new opportunities will be available to both banks and non-banks alike, and it is up to all of them to take advantage of this new environment. The European Central Bank (ECB) and the European Commission urge the banking industry and all other stakeholders to maintain momentum and intensify their preparations for the launch of the SEPA by 1 January 2008 and its subsequent successful and timely implementation.What impact do we expect non-banks to have on the modernisation process? A study by McKinsey in 2005 [2] was quite revealing in this respect. It estimated that the European payment industry in the 25 countries of the EU generated revenues of up to 125 billion euro, with profits of 10 billion euro. A comparison of the USA with the EU in this study showed that payment revenues in the USA are higher than in any EU country, but that US payment costs also exceed EU levels. Nevertheless, profitability is very high compared with the EU. It further revealed that, in Europe, credit cards are the most profitable payment instrument for banks, while cash payments, which amount to 50% of all direct payment costs for banks, are quite heavily subsidised by the banking community. According to industry estimates, electronic payments growth will outpace GDP growth in many countries in the near future, showing a compound annual rate of about 10%. Such growth is expected to continue to take a share from payment means of declining popularity, such as cash and cheques. [3] Not mentioned here are the expected savings in corporate treasury departments, and that this is where pressure to reorganise comes from. In what ways can non-banks be expected to contribute to future market developments which have traditionally been the preserve of banks? As far as cashless payments are concerned, non-banks have been very active along the whole payments processing chain, either as back office processors or front end service providers which interface directly with clients. Non-banks have been very successful in profitable niche markets , such as customers not served by banks, account aggregation, electronic bill presentment and payment (EBPP) and online peer-to-peer payments (P2P). [4] A good example of P2P is PayPal, which initially focused on online auction sites. Others include Google Checkout for online shopping and the online payment service, Click and Buy. We expect non-banks to be able to identify customers’ needs that are not sufficiently met by traditional payment instruments and to gain from network economies  [5] It has been observed that the more an innovative payment solution relies on synergies with instruments enjoying public acceptance, the more success its services enjoy. For example, e-payments conducted over mobiles phones and cards, which provide added value to existing, bank-based payment instruments. Currently, around 45 billion retail payment transactions are processed in the euro area each year [6]. Non-banks may also promote the cost-efficient processing of bank-based payment transactions, where the interface or client relationship is kept by the bank. They are often the force for ensuring real-time authentication and authorisation of payment orders, thus reducing processing times and helping users, merchants and banks in minimising risks. Non-banks offer complementary services to banks, basing their success on economies of scale It is also conceivable that a bank may establish its own ‘non-bank’ and confer upon it part of its payment functions. Thus, the questions raised are to what extent outsourcing could expand, and whether banks in the future would maintain commercial relations with their clients, as is the case in the IT business nowadays. The potential role that non-banks could assume raises a number of open questions about the pain to be experienced by both banks and non-banks in the payments area with regard to their future organisational models. First, it will require banks to address their current and future cost and revenue models. Second, current banking practices for executing payments will have to be reconsidered in the light of level-playing-field competition. Third, it will require banks to develop new payment mechanisms in order to benefit from being the first mover. Fourth, it will challenge banks to fully exploit the benefits of new technologies in order to maintain client relationships and their competitive edge. Fifth, with the SEPA and PSD initiatives, both banks and non-banks in the euro area will have to reconsider the scale of the operations and the markets they serve. Six, they will also have to take into consideration their national and cross-border alliances for the organisation and delivery of payment services.My message to all players involved in innovating the way payments are processed is that they should consider the user perspective and, in particular, the consumer benefits from lower costs. Corporations could make substantial savings from paper-free bill presentation and e-reconciliation. Progress with information and communication technology can be used to offer customers convenient, secure and efficient services that make their life easier and allow them to free up resources. Customers can thus reduce both their costs and risks, and also save liquidity. I support the standardisation of all initiation channels, for example Internet banking, ATMs, paper-based forms and interoperability , so that the new products can be used by customers using different channels at no additional cost. Customers will be prepared to pay for the services that offer these benefits. This is a win-win situation for both service providers and customers. There are huge opportunities for growth in the financial industry. A recent study by Mercer Oliver Wyman (2005) on the future of financial services predicts that growing demand will be met by a plethora of different providers, allowing the industry to grow from 6% to 10% of GDP. [7] I have always encouraged banks in Europe and the European Payments Council to step up their activities on e-payments and m-payments. Given the benefits of innovation, I would like to emphasise that central banks act as catalysts in supporting innovation in payment systems and instruments from both banks and non-banks when it improves market efficiencies and benefits the user community.Finally, I would like to address the risks associated with modernising payments as well as the role of central banks. As I mentioned earlier, the Payment Service Directive will provide Europe with a framework that will increase consumer protection, as well as enhance competition and promote innovation. Consequently, non-banks will be subject to authorisation and prudential supervision by the authority to be selected by the Member States among the national authorities, including central banks. This leads me on to the policy challenges for central banks and regulators: how to ensure that a level playing field will exist for all market participants. First, the central banks and regulators will have to analyse the risks posed by diversified players. For both banks and non-banks, the opportunities for innovation may be coupled with risks that have not yet been studied in great detail and largely concern operational risk, security threats, fraud, and legal risk from merchant disputes, if the legal and regulatory framework is not adequately addressed. [8] New intermediation channels and new system interdependencies must be analysed from a systemic risk perspective. Central banks, therefore, while supporting and monitoring the innovation process, must nevertheless identify and analyse the new risks and reflect on adequate policy responses to the emerging payment landscape.While banks face the challenges of innovation and new players, in some central and eastern European countries, there is still potential for growth in banking intermediation, winning new customers and selling additional services. The level of banking assets to GDP and the access to and use of banking services in some of those countries has been well below the European average. [9] Financial intermediation in some central and eastern European countries will catch up with levels in the rest of Europe. For both banks and non-banks, this translates into considerable opportunities for growth in terms of both traditional and new banking services. Second, with regard to risk analysis, central banks and regulators will have to develop adequate risk mitigation standards. Existing participants and, in particular, regulated banks will quite rightly expect that any new market entrants should be subject to a similar or equal regulatory environment for payment functions. The euro area central banks are particularly committed to carefully monitoring payment innovation and non-banks, while ensuring the smooth functioning of payment systems and financial stability. At present, the national authorities in the EU have different regulatory frameworks for payment service providers, processes or instruments. It will be a challenge to have a framework that will ensure that all participants in the payment services chain are treated equally with regard to the risks they undertake. Third, central banks must recognise that, in a largely interdependent world, the protection of personal data flowing across countries’ borders is expected at all levels of processing so as not to compromise public confidence  The banking sector, unlike any other industry, is underpinned by public trust and confidence, giving rise to the requirement to ensure financial stability. Public acceptance of payment instruments relies on public trust in their safe and efficient use. Users and small merchants may not be able to assess on their own the possible risks or liabilities they are taking when choosing among alternative payment instruments if information on those risks is not clear or adequate to their needs. Innovative payment services or those that comprise elements of traditional payment instruments may be particularly challenging in this respect. These issues are not as pronounced in other deregulated industries. While the banking industry still largely provides the underlying infrastructure for payments, it is essential that the entry of new competitors in the area of payments occurs under conditions that do not compromise the data protection, governance, safety and public confidence that are traditionally associated with the banking industry. It is therefore clear that modernising payments will also cause some pain to central banks and regulators, as we will have to rise to the challenge of innovation and deal with new or changing market participants. In parallel, private sector initiatives, such as the European Payments Council and the Global Payments Council to name but two, need to intensify their efforts to promote standardisation and interoperability. All this has to come in a spirit of open access to and from all providers and systems so that, first, the end users may use products at no extra cost, irrespective of the channels and means with which they interface and, second, data protection and security are not compromised. [10] Europe has already made significant progress on modernising the payment industry, with the SEPA project constituting a key driver for change. Certain challenges still lie ahead for all of us. This conference is most welcome because further analysis is necessary to understand the changes in the payment industry, the impact of these changes on the risks involved and the efficiency gains from payment innovation.Payment systems are often described as the plumbing of the financial sector. Plumbers are not usually in the spotlight, but they provide a service that is recognised by everyone as essential to our day-to-day life. However, some two years ago, plumbers accidentally found themselves in the spotlight during debates on an EU directive for the liberalisation of cross-border services and on the future of the EU more generally. In France, a plumber from a new Member State became the symbol for ruinous competition from abroad. The debate illustrated that it takes courage and time to overcome the fear of immediate pain in order to realise future gains. The modernisation process is worth the effort and will benefit the payment industry and society as a whole. I would therefore encourage the payment industry to take up the challenges and lead the process forward towards more modern and innovative payment systems. Thank you very much for your attention.[1] See: http://www.no-pain-no-gain.com [2] McKinsey (2005) “European Payment Profit Pool Analysis: Casting Light in Murky Waters”.[3] ACI Worldwide Global Electronic Payments Market Study and Forecast, May 2006. The level of expected growth in the single countries considered may vary considerably. [4] S. Chakravorti, E. Kobor, Why Invest in Payment Innovations, Policy Studies, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 2003. [5] A. Milne, What’s in it for us? Network effects and bank payment innovation, Bank of Finland Research Discussion Papers 16/2005. [6] 43.4 billion transactions in 2003 (Source: Blue Book, ECB 2006).[7] Mercer Oliver Wyman, (2005), The Future of Financial Services, Future Industry Scenarios, p. 64.[8] M. Furletti, The Laws, Regulations, and Industry Practices That Protect Consumers Who Use Electronic Payment Systems: Policy Considerations, Discussion Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, October 2005. [9] S. Barisitz, Banking in Central and Eastern Europe since the Turn of the Millenium – An overview of structural modernisation in ten countries, National Bank of Austria, Focus on European Economic Integration 2/2005, p. 79. [10] K. Kemppainen, Competition and regulation in European retail payment systems, Bank of Finland Discussion Papers 16/2003. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur present thought relev topic confer name role nonbank payment field modernis payment pain gain titl gave weiner colleagu coupl month ago luncheon address felt titl would captur nice essenc modernis process payment innov modernis rare occur without pressur competit exampl one player market develop method offer servic product cheaper better way player need adapt order lose innov competitor often entri new market player outsid upset exist balanc among current incumb radic chang sector cours network industri like payment specif characterist cannot liken exact textbook model market competit howev close link innov competit still hold benefit advantag one market player often cost disadvantag anoth schumpet th centuri harvard economist root home countri austria describ process econom modernis creativ destruct wherebi exist wellestablish product procedur destroy replac newer better one short pain gain last week prepar speech learnt titl chosen also name movi came two year ago movi pain gain unsuccess usa win award film festiv smalltown champion bodybuild ohio travel los angel order train beat arch rival mission prove natur scienc hard work triumph steroid use review ironman magazin prais film great movi everi bodybuild fan sport see upon read film titl sought reassur american friend audienc today would like know film titl speech would therefor give rise wrong kind expect said think imag bodybuild complet mark seem certain muscleflex go payment field moment nonbank crossbord competit put pressur exist servic structur process speech would like focus innov retail payment particular three issu first drive payment innov particular europ second challeng involv payment process final possibl risk role central bank chang thing innov quit often involv experienc shortterm pain return longterm benefit especi case field payment system upfront cost involv improv effici effect servic often distract longterm benefit uncertain tradit field retail payment essenti function perform payment servic industri market particip compris remain relat constant decad nevertheless huge invest made improv process infrastructur remain fragment nation border europ current payment industri midst period rapid chang transform polit regulatori initi intensifi intern competit rapid innov new payment servic explos growth inform technolog possibl key driver chang moreov custom today hightech era start voic demand expect electron servic reflect updod technolog capabl europ activ welcom payment innov seek creat regulatori condit conduc modernis notabl exampl although one marketdriven initi establish singl euro payment area sepa eight year introduct euro payment servic still larg organis within nation border sepa project seek chang provid common technic commerci standard bank industri europ sepa project key driver innov elimin differ nation crossbord payment santa fe two year ago could tell vision today report happen simpler cheaper crossbord payment way confid sepa also stimul intens use electron payment instrument research indic differ level competit exist individu countri europ histor differ cost revenu driver base larg nation payment channel tradit usag payment instrument start point move forward sepa environ also differ howev combin forthcom sepa general appetit societi innov technolog lead excel opportun market particip realis innov retail payment solut sepa underpin robust legal framework drawn european author form payment servic direct psd one week ago european union eu legislatur reach consensus psd harmonis nation legal framework direct great facilit implement sepa instrument bank industri furthermor psd creat new phenomenon payment institut sole domain bank institut nonbank competitor enter payment market henceforth clear regulatori framework name licens supervis increas competit along chang technolog fuel need innov new payment product servic infrastructur provid major benefit wider economi messag europ quit clear groundwork condit singl payment market euro area prepar eu take posit proactiv stanc toward innov regardless divers practic differ region irrespect natur institut involv notwithstand differ start point sepa psd initi act catalyst promot increas choic competit greater innov transpar price servic avail custom new opportun avail bank nonbank alik take advantag new environ european central bank ecb european commiss urg bank industri stakehold maintain momentum intensifi prepar launch sepa januari subsequ success time implement impact expect nonbank modernis process studi mckinsey quit reveal respect estim european payment industri countri eu generat revenu billion euro profit billion euro comparison usa eu studi show payment revenu usa higher eu countri us payment cost also exceed eu level nevertheless profit high compar eu reveal europ credit card profit payment instrument bank cash payment amount direct payment cost bank quit heavili subsidis bank communiti accord industri estim electron payment growth outpac gdp growth mani countri near futur show compound annual rate growth expect continu take share payment mean declin popular cash chequ mention expect save corpor treasuri depart pressur reorganis come way nonbank expect contribut futur market develop tradit preserv bank far cashless payment concern nonbank activ along whole payment process chain either back offic processor front end servic provid interfac direct client nonbank success profit nich market custom serv bank account aggreg electron bill present payment ebpp onlin peertop payment p p good exampl p p paypal initi focus onlin auction site other includ googl checkout onlin shop onlin payment servic click buy expect nonbank abl identifi custom need suffici met tradit payment instrument gain network economi observ innov payment solut reli synergi instrument enjoy public accept success servic enjoy exampl epay conduct mobil phone card provid ad valu exist bankbas payment instrument current around billion retail payment transact process euro area year nonbank may also promot costeffici process bankbas payment transact interfac client relationship kept bank often forc ensur realtim authent authoris payment order thus reduc process time help user merchant bank minimis risk nonbank offer complementari servic bank base success economi scale also conceiv bank may establish nonbank confer upon part payment function thus question rais extent outsourc could expand whether bank futur would maintain commerci relat client case busi nowaday potenti role nonbank could assum rais number open question pain experienc bank nonbank payment area regard futur organis model first requir bank address current futur cost revenu model second current bank practic execut payment reconsid light levelplayingfield competit third requir bank develop new payment mechan order benefit first mover fourth challeng bank fulli exploit benefit new technolog order maintain client relationship competit edg fifth sepa psd initi bank nonbank euro area reconsid scale oper market serv six also take consider nation crossbord allianc organis deliveri payment servic messag player involv innov way payment process consid user perspect particular consum benefit lower cost corpor could make substanti save paperfre bill present ereconcili progress inform communic technolog use offer custom conveni secur effici servic make life easier allow free resourc custom thus reduc cost risk also save liquid support standardis initi channel exampl internet bank atm paperbas form interoper new product use custom use differ channel addit cost custom prepar pay servic offer benefit winwin situat servic provid custom huge opportun growth financi industri recent studi mercer oliv wyman futur financi servic predict grow demand met plethora differ provid allow industri grow gdp alway encourag bank europ european payment council step activ epay mpayment given benefit innov would like emphasis central bank act catalyst support innov payment system instrument bank nonbank improv market effici benefit user communiti final would like address risk associ modernis payment well role central bank mention earlier payment servic direct provid europ framework increas consum protect well enhanc competit promot innov consequ nonbank subject authoris prudenti supervis author select member state among nation author includ central bank lead polici challeng central bank regul ensur level play field exist market particip first central bank regul analys risk pose diversifi player bank nonbank opportun innov may coupl risk yet studi great detail larg concern oper risk secur threat fraud legal risk merchant disput legal regulatori framework adequ address new intermedi channel new system interdepend must analys system risk perspect central bank therefor support monitor innov process must nevertheless identifi analys new risk reflect adequ polici respons emerg payment landscap bank face challeng innov new player central eastern european countri still potenti growth bank intermedi win new custom sell addit servic level bank asset gdp access use bank servic countri well european averag financi intermedi central eastern european countri catch level rest europ bank nonbank translat consider opportun growth term tradit new bank servic second regard risk analysi central bank regul develop adequ risk mitig standard exist particip particular regul bank quit right expect new market entrant subject similar equal regulatori environ payment function euro area central bank particular commit care monitor payment innov nonbank ensur smooth function payment system financi stabil present nation author eu differ regulatori framework payment servic provid process instrument challeng framework ensur particip payment servic chain treat equal regard risk undertak third central bank must recognis larg interdepend world protect person data flow across countri border expect level process compromis public confid bank sector unlik industri underpin public trust confid give rise requir ensur financi stabil public accept payment instrument reli public trust safe effici use user small merchant may abl assess possibl risk liabil take choos among altern payment instrument inform risk clear adequ need innov payment servic compris element tradit payment instrument may particular challeng respect issu pronounc deregul industri bank industri still larg provid under infrastructur payment essenti entri new competitor area payment occur condit compromis data protect govern safeti public confid tradit associ bank industri therefor clear modernis payment also caus pain central bank regul rise challeng innov deal new chang market particip parallel privat sector initi european payment council global payment council name two need intensifi effort promot standardis interoper come spirit open access provid system first end user may use product extra cost irrespect channel mean interfac second data protect secur compromis europ alreadi made signific progress modernis payment industri sepa project constitut key driver chang certain challeng still lie ahead us confer welcom analysi necessari understand chang payment industri impact chang risk involv effici gain payment innov payment system often describ plumb financi sector plumber usual spotlight provid servic recognis everyon essenti daytoday life howev two year ago plumber accident found spotlight debat eu direct liberalis crossbord servic futur eu general franc plumber new member state becam symbol ruinous competit abroad debat illustr take courag time overcom fear immedi pain order realis futur gain modernis process worth effort benefit payment industri societi whole would therefor encourag payment industri take challeng lead process forward toward modern innov payment system thank much attent see http www nopainnogain com mckinsey european payment profit pool analysi cast light murki water aci worldwid global electron payment market studi forecast may level expect growth singl countri consid may vari consider chakravorti e kobor invest payment innov polici studi feder reserv bank chicago miln us network effect bank payment innov bank finland research discuss paper billion transact sourc blue book ecb mercer oliv wyman futur financi servic futur industri scenario p m furletti law regul industri practic protect consum use electron payment system polici consider discuss paper feder reserv bank philadelphia octob barisitz bank central eastern europ sinc turn millenium overview structur modernis ten countri nation bank austria focus european econom integr p k kemppainen competit regul european retail payment system bank finland discuss paper reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en