"Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Real convergence in Central, Eastern and South-Eastern Europe",01-10-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,3703,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen:I would like to welcome you all to Frankfurt, and to our economic conference on central, eastern and south-eastern Europe. Let me start by saying a few words about the meeting itself, which is the second of its kind. With this conference the ECB aims to foster cooperation and provide a forum for a multilateral discussion among central bankers in the region. Taking a regional perspective is useful given the similarities in economic structures of the countries concerned. To a large extent, these similarities reflect the common background of transition to a market economy. This transition has important implications, in particular with respect to policy challenges. In the region, ten countries are Member States of the European Union, while the remaining seven are candidate or potential candidate countries at different stages of the process. [2] But the feedback we have received from last year's conference indicated that this heterogeneity actually reinforces the usefulness of taking a regional perspective.This brings me to the overriding theme of this conference, real convergence. As central bankers, we are used to discuss nominal convergence, since it is at the heart of our main task, maintaining price stability. It is also at the heart of the Maastricht criteria on the adoption of the euro. However, we chose this time to focus on the other side of the coin. There are three reasons for this. First, catching up is the main goal of all the countries under review. Second, real convergence has gained momentum in recent years, also in countries where progress had been slower in the 1990s. Third, real convergence has important implications for nominal convergence.Against this background, I will first briefly review some stylised facts of real convergence in central, eastern and south-eastern Europe. I will then turn to selected aspects of the convergence process, namely growth and convergence, financial globalisation and the current account, financial development,and finally, implications for monetary policy.By contrasting theory and empirical evidence I would like to bring the attention to some interesting and unresolved issues and to identify key policy challenges that the conference participants might want to consider further. Let me start with some facts and figures. The convergence experience in central, eastern and south-eastern Europe can be summarised as follows:Following notable output losses during the early 1990s, all countries in the region have seen a strong recovery. With a few exceptions, most of them have passed their pre-transition levels of real per capita income. The recovery resulted in convergence towards the real income per capita level in the euro area. In the EU Member States of the region, real per capita income reached 40% of the euro area level in 2005, an increase of about nine percentage points since 1993. In candidate and potential candidate countries – excluding Turkey – a rise of seven percentage points was recorded in the same period, so that at end-2005, their average real per capita income stood at about 23% of the euro area level.The timing and speed of convergence has varied substantially, reflecting differences in political stability and progress in structural reforms. Strong growth, fostered by structural reforms, investment and FDI, has been a key feature of economic developments in almost all New Member States since the mid-1990s. In most candidate and potential candidate countries, instead, the catching-up process has gained speed only in this decade.Total factor productivity has been the main driver of growth and convergence across the region. Labour productivity has increased in all countries, closing the gap relative to the euro area. At the same time, in many countries labour utilisation is substantially below the euro area level, reflecting the large size of the informal sector as well as labour market frictions and mismatches. To sum up: substantial progress has been made, but gaps in terms of income per capita relative to the euro area remain large. This suggests that the challenges of real convergence, which you have the opportunity to discuss today and tomorrow, will remain relevant for several years.In the last few years, the economic profession has been engaged in a controversial discussion on the origins of growth. [3] To a large extent, the debate was triggered by the empirical observation of increasing divergence of per capita income across countries. [4] Indeed, the evidence seemed to contradict a key prediction of standard growth theory: countries with relatively low per capita income should catch-up with richer ones. In theory, since capital is generally scarce in low income countries its rate of return should be higher than in richer economies, investment should be stronger, resulting in an increasing capital stock, production and finally income. Thus, per capita income differences should fall over time. Clearly, the global evidence on divergence of per capita income is inconsistent with this reasoning.Two avenues have been followed to address this contradiction. The first one tries to take into account factors that actually prevent the marginal product of capital to fall – or at least: prevent it from falling to zero – even if the capital intensity of production is rising over time, as theory would predict. Literally millions of cross-country regressions [5] have been run to identify factors conditioning convergence, from the investment rate itself to macroeconomic, financial sector and institutional variables. And while absolute convergence has not been supported by the data, conditional convergence has been found to hold, even if not in all samples and periods.Evidence of convergence in central, eastern and south-eastern Europe lends strong support to the conditional convergence hypothesis of standard growth theory. To be sure the acquis communautaire is a structural factor which has provided a common framework for the countries in the region to engage in rapid convergence. [6] To sustain the catching-up with living standards in the euro area, continued structural convergence along the lines of the acquis communautaire is crucial, in particular in candidate and potential candidate countries.However, there are also features in the current catching-up process that are at odds with established growth empirics. In particular, several empirical studies suggest that convergence in the region seems to have been driven by the growth of total factor productivity. [7] This contrasts with the evidence found for other rapidly converging economies, for example in Asia, where capital accumulation has been identified as the main driver of real convergence with advanced economies. [8]Transition is the prime candidate to account for this anomaly. The heritage of central planning left many economies with large inefficiencies in production, which offered a vast potential for efficiency gains in the course of the regime shift. Economies in the region have made extensive use of this potential. This nevertheless raises an important question on the sustainability of the convergence process in the future. If strong TFP growth has been mainly the result of transition, it is not a renewable source of convergence for the future (i.e., when transition is over). Other sources must be found. One factor is efficient financial intermediation. After all, the financial sector is the “brain” of the market economy in allocating resources and allowing capital to flow to its most productive use. [9] This is what the empirical literature on finance and growth suggests, namely that financial development is significantly correlated with total factor productivity and less so with private savings rates or capital accumulation. [10] Clearly, financial development in the region has advance rapidly. Nonetheless, capital accumulation should be expected to make a larger contribution to growth and real convergence in the future. However, while investment rates have been rising in central, eastern and south-eastern Europe, they are not particularly high by emerging market standards. Compared with emerging Asia they can even be considered as rather low. Why have investment rates been relatively subdued and what are the policies to be pursued fostering capital formation? Conceptually, the policy question may be easy to answer: continued structural reforms, enhancing flexibility in labour and product markets, improving the business climate and governance. These are the standard responses. However, a rise in investment might contribute to a further widening of current account deficits. Indeed, in recent years investment in the region has been increasingly financed by tapping foreign savings. As a result, current account deficits have reached levels of more than 10% of GDP in several countries. From a theoretical perspective, current account deficits may actually be interpreted as in line with the predictions of standard theory. [11] However, other emerging market economies have seen just the opposite pattern, namely convergence accompanied by improving current account balances, most visible in the high and widening current account surpluses in emerging Asia. It is even more striking that current account surpluses have been observed in parallel with increasing financial globalisation. Financial globalisation should facilitate capital flowing from rich to poor countries, the opposite of what we observe. This is known, as you know, as the “Lucas paradox” from the seminal article where Lucas pointed out that capital is flowing from emerging to advanced economies, contradicting predictions of standard models of trade and growth. [12] This paradox can still be observed in many parts of the world, resulting in what are commonly known as global imbalances. [13] Various explanations have been suggested to account for this at least seemingly paradoxical development. On the one hand, rate of return differentials might be smaller than suggested by the relative scarcity and abundance of capital, reflecting larger risks related to a higher level of uncertainty due to less developed legal and financial systems. Vice versa, the lower level of institutional quality in many emerging market economies might result in an outflow of capital because of lesser opportunities for financial investment. [14] Countries in central, eastern and south-eastern Europe seem once again to be special among emerging markets. Their process of real convergence has been accompanied by very different current account developments than in other emerging markets. Why have countries in the region, while accumulating sizeable foreign exchange reserves, used so much foreign savings to finance current spending? Have financial factors that explain the current account surpluses in emerging Asia had a different impact in emerging Europe? [15] Finding an answer to these questions is important not only to square empirical evidence with theory, but also from a policy perspective. Should policy makers get comfort from the fact that the imbalances in central, eastern and south-eastern Europe are in line with standard economic theory? Or should we be worried that these imbalances can be very disruptive for convergence if they prove to be unsustainable, as corrections can be painful and costly? [16]Let me now focus more closely on financial factors in the region, in particular the banking sector, which has seen a very peculiar form of structural convergence and financial integration. In most countries the banking sector is dominated by subsidiaries or branches of banks headquartered in the euro area. [17] While similar developments have been also seen in other emerging market economies [18], the process is unique in emerging Europe [19], where banks have expanded their presence in what has been perceived to become a single, large European financial market in the future.Financial deepening in the region has been extremely rapid. Credit growth rates have been particularly high for consumer and mortgage lending, reaching in some countries and in some years more than 100% p.a. Should we be worried by these developments? Research suggests that rapid credit growth does not necessarily lead to financial turbulence, but it is one of the main predictors. [20] Moreover, the structure of credit, featuring prominently loans denominated in foreign currency, gives reason for concern. How sustainable are debt burdens in the case of an economic downturn or significant exchange rate depreciation? Are the speed limits to real convergence set by financial factors? This brings me to the last point I would like to deal with in these introductory remarks, namely the challenges for monetary policy. Until recently, demand pressures arising from strong credit growth and capital inflows have not been reflected in rising inflation for three reasons. First, strong productivity growth. Second, the current account, financed largely by FDI, which served as a convenient outlet for buoyant demand. Third, in nearly all these economies there is still substantial slack in the labour market, which is being nevertheless quickly absorbed.Over the last two years, domestic demand pressures have started to increase and have been reflected in domestic price developments. Does this mean that countries have reached or even passed their growth potential? The evidence is not clear-cut. While there has been strong growth in recent years, labour utilisation has remained low. The same holds for participation and employment rates. Unemployment, even though declining recently, is still high in many countries. There thus seems to be ample space for a larger contribution of labour to growth, mitigating the constraints for a further rise of potential output. At the same time, labour markets in the region are characterised by substantial mismatches. [21] Moreover, labour market disequilibria may be exacerbated by significant migration flows, limiting the supply response to the rise in demand at least in some countries. As a result, we observe the paradox of low labour utilisation and tight labour markets at the same time. Theory suggests that in a process of rapid real convergence countries should experience higher overall inflation rates, due to the Balassa-Samuelson effect. However, the recent rise in inflation can hardly be explained by this effect alone. A review of empirical studies on the size of the Balassa-Samuelson effect in central, eastern and south-eastern European countries suggests that the effect is not very large and might even have declined over time. [22] This would suggest that the latest increase in inflation reflects overheating rather than a catching-up phenomenon. Keeping nominal convergence on track is the main policy challenge in the region. The problem becomes particularly acute in countries which have given up monetary policy independence by choosing an exchange rate target or adopting a currency board arrangement.The key question for these countries is: how is it possible to keep inflation under control by pegging the exchange rate, which means adopting de facto the monetary policy of the euro area, especially since the euro area economy is growing at a rate that is less than a third of what a catching-up economy should aim to achieve? In other words, how is it possible to keep inflation under control with very low or even at times negative real interest rates? What are the risks for financial stability of having persistently low real interest rates, much lower than the rate of growth of the economy? I will not go into details on this issue, but I would like to recall that even in advanced economies periods of low interest rates might fuel financial turbulence, as the recent events show. To be sure, keeping nominal convergence on track is not only a challenge for monetary policy, but also for fiscal and structural policies. Improving supply side conditions and a tight budget can certainly mitigate inflationary pressures stemming from strong domestic demand. One has nonetheless to be realistic in defining the requirements for budgetary, income and structural policies that are consistent with achieving at the same time real and nominal convergence. I guess the real question to ask is: how large should the budget surplus be to counteract the inflationary effects produced by a pro-cyclical monetary policy and would this be acceptable for a catching-up country? How far reaching, and acceptable to the population, should structural reforms be? All in all, the requirements for the budgetary and structural policies associated with an exchange rate linked to the euro might just be too demanding to counteract the procyclical effects of very low real interest rates. This might lead to boom and bust cycles, with potentially very severe adjustments costs that may delay real convergence. After having raised several provocative questions to launch the conference, let me conclude. Substantial progress in real convergence has been achieved in central, eastern and south-eastern Europe. This has happened with respect to real per capita income but also to economic structures, the business and institutional environment as well as macroeconomic policies. At the same time, the path for catching up remains large and fraught with risks. The income gap with the euro area, while significantly reduced, is still large. In candidate and potential candidate countries much remains to be done to also advance structural convergence. And the recent signs of overheating present a significant challenge for macroeconomic and structural policies. I wanted to open this conference by raising issues that – having the conference programme in mind – will be further developed in the next 36 hours, from an analytical as well as a policy perspective. I wish you stimulating discussions and a successful conference. Thank you very much for your attention.Abiad, A., Leigh, D. and Mody, A., (2007), “International Finance and Income Convergence: Europe is Different”, IMF Working Paper, No. 64, International Monetary Fund, Washington.Adalet, M. and Eichengreen, B., (2005), “Current Account Reversals: Always a Problem?” prepared for the NBER Conference on G7 Current Account Imbalances, Newport, Rhode Island, 1-2 June 2005.Arcalean, C., Calvo-Gonzalez, O., Móré, Cs., van Rixtel, A., Winkler, A. and Zumer, T., (2007), “The Causes and Nature of Rapid Growth of Bank Credit in the Central, Eastern, and South Eastern European Countries”, in Charles Enoch and Inci Ötker-Robe (eds.), Rapid Credit Growth in Central and Eastern Europe, Endless Boom or Early Warning? Palgrave Macmillan, New York.Arratibel, O., Heinz, F., Martin, R., Przybyla, M., Rawdanowicz, L., Serafini, R. and Zumer, T., (2007), “Determinants of Growth in the Central and Eastern European EU Member States – a Production Function Approach”, ECB Occasional Paper Series No 61.Baumol, W. and Wolff, E.N., (1988), “Productivity Growth, Convergence, and Welfare: Reply”, American Economic Review, Vol. 78(5), 1155-59.Beck, T., Levine, R. and Loayza, N., (2000), Finance and the Sources of Growth, Journal of Financial Economics, 58, 261-300Berglöf, E. and Bolton, P., (2002), “The great divide and beyond. Financial architecture in transition”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16 (1), pp. 77-100.Bini Smaghi, L., (2007), “Global imbalances and monetary policy”, Journal of Policy Modeling, forthcoming.Bussière, M., Fratzscher, M. and Mueller, G.J., (2004), “Current Account Dynamics in OECD and EU Acceding Countries – An Intertemporal Approach”, ECB Working Paper Series, No. 311, European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main. Commander, S. and Kollo, J., (2004), “The Changing Demand for Skills: Evidence from the Transition”, IZA Working Papers No 1073.De Gregorio, J. and Guidotti, P.E., (1992), Financial Development and Economic Growth, IMF Working Paper, WP/92/101, Washington D.C.DeLong, J.B. and Summers, L.H., (1991), “Equipment investment and economic growth”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(2), pp. 445-502.Dowrick, S. and DeLong, J.B., (2003), “Globalisation and Convergence”, in Michael Bordo et al , (ed.), Globalization in Historical Perspective, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.IMF, (2006), “Asia Rising: Patterns of Economic Development and Growth”, in World Economic Outlook, September, Chapter 3.Landesmann, M., Vidovic, H. and Ward, T., (2004), “Economic Restructuring and Labour Market Developments in the New EU Member States”, The Vienna Institute for International Economic Studies.Leon-Ledesma, M., Nerlich, C. and Rupprecht, S., (2007), “The impact of real convergence on inflation in the new EU Member States”, mimeo.Levine, R., (1997), “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda”, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXV pp. 688-726.Lucas, R.E., (1990), “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?”, American Economic Review, Vol. 80(2), pp. 92-96.Luengnaruemitchai, P. and Schadler, S., (2007), “Do Economists’ and Financial Markets’ Perspectives on the New Members of the EU differ?”, IMF Working Paper 07/65, March, Washington DC.Mankiw, N.G., (1995), “The growth of nations”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 25, pp. 275-310.Merton, R. and Bodie, Z., (1995), A Conceptual Framework for Analysing the Financial Environment, in Crane, D.B. (ed.), The Global Financial System: a Functional Perspective, Boston: Harvard Business School Press.Mihaljek, D., (2006), “Privatisation, consolidation and the increased role of foreign banks”, in BIS papers No. 28, pp. 41-65.Moreno, R. and Villar, A., (2005), “The increased role of foreign bank entry in emerging markets”, in BIS papers No. 23, pp. 9-16, Basel.Morgese Borys, M., Polgar, E.K. and Zlate, A., (2007), “Real convergence in central, eastern and south-eastern Europe”, ECB mimeo.Musso A. and Westermann, T., (2005), “Assessing potential output growth in the euro area – a growth accounting perspective”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 22, Frankfurt am Main. Prasad, E., Rajan, R. and Subramanian, A., (2007), “The Paradox of Capital, Finance and Development”, Vol. 44, No. 1, International Monetary Fund, Washington.Pritchett, L., (1997), “Divergence, Big Time”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 11, No. 3, Summer 1997, pp. 3-17.Sachs, J., Tornell, A. and Velascó, A., (1996), “Financial Crises in Emerging Markets: The Lessons from 1995”, NBER Working Paper No. W5576.Sala-i-Martin, X., (1997), “I just ran two million regressions,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 87, pp. 178-83.Young, A., (1995), “The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of the East Asian Growth Experience”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, pp. 641-680.[1] The views expressed in this note reflect only those of the author. I thank Eva Katalin Polgar and Adalbert Winkler for their input in the preparation of these remarks.[2] The ten EU members are: Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia; the seven candidates or potential candidates are: Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia.[3] For an overview see Mankiw (1995).[4] See Pritchett (1997).[5] Borrowing from the title of the paper by Sala-i-Martin (1997).[6] However, it could also be argued that European integration is so special that the evidence on convergence in Europe – by way of exception – confirms the rule of divergence. This line of reasoning is further developed in the literature on convergence clubs; see for example, Baumol and Wolff (1988) and Dowrick and De Long (2003).[7] See Arratibel et al. (2007) and Morgese Borys et al. (2007).[8] See Young (1995) and IMF (2006).[9]  See Merton and Bodie (1995).[10]  See for example De Gregorio and Guidotti (1992) and Beck, Levine and Loayza (2000).[11] See for example, Bussière et al. (2004).[12] Lucas (1990).[13] See also Prasad et al. (2007).[14] See Bini Smaghi (2007).[15] The answer by Abiad et al. (2007) is a positive one, identifying rapid financial integration of the countries under review as a key factor in explaining the difference to other emerging markets. Financial market differences between countries in the region and other emerging market economies are also stressed by Luengnaruemitchai and Schadler (2007) and Bini Smaghi (2007).[16] See e.g. Adalet and Eichengreen (2005).[17] See Arcalean et al. (2007).[18] See Mihaljek (2006) and Moreno and Villar (2005).[19] See Berglöf and Bolton (2002).[20] See e.g. Sachs et al. (1996).[21] See Landesmann et al. (2004) and Commander and Kollo (2004).[22] Leon-Ledesma et al. (2007).Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen would like welcom frankfurt econom confer central eastern southeastern europ let start say word meet second kind confer ecb aim foster cooper provid forum multilater discuss among central banker region take region perspect use given similar econom structur countri concern larg extent similar reflect common background transit market economi transit import implic particular respect polici challeng region ten countri member state european union remain seven candid potenti candid countri differ stage process feedback receiv last year confer indic heterogen actual reinforc use take region perspect bring overrid theme confer real converg central banker use discuss nomin converg sinc heart main task maintain price stabil also heart maastricht criteria adopt euro howev chose time focus side coin three reason first catch main goal countri review second real converg gain momentum recent year also countri progress slower third real converg import implic nomin converg background first briefli review stylis fact real converg central eastern southeastern europ turn select aspect converg process name growth converg financi globalis current account financi develop final implic monetari polici contrast theori empir evid would like bring attent interest unresolv issu identifi key polici challeng confer particip might want consid let start fact figur converg experi central eastern southeastern europ summaris follow follow notabl output loss earli countri region seen strong recoveri except pass pretransit level real per capita incom recoveri result converg toward real incom per capita level euro area eu member state region real per capita incom reach euro area level increas nine percentag point sinc candid potenti candid countri exclud turkey rise seven percentag point record period end averag real per capita incom stood euro area level time speed converg vari substanti reflect differ polit stabil progress structur reform strong growth foster structur reform invest fdi key featur econom develop almost new member state sinc mid candid potenti candid countri instead catchingup process gain speed decad total factor product main driver growth converg across region labour product increas countri close gap relat euro area time mani countri labour utilis substanti euro area level reflect larg size inform sector well labour market friction mismatch sum substanti progress made gap term incom per capita relat euro area remain larg suggest challeng real converg opportun discuss today tomorrow remain relev sever year last year econom profess engag controversi discuss origin growth larg extent debat trigger empir observ increas diverg per capita incom across countri inde evid seem contradict key predict standard growth theori countri relat low per capita incom catchup richer one theori sinc capit general scarc low incom countri rate return higher richer economi invest stronger result increas capit stock product final incom thus per capita incom differ fall time clear global evid diverg per capita incom inconsist reason two avenu follow address contradict first one tri take account factor actual prevent margin product capit fall least prevent fall zero even capit intens product rise time theori would predict liter million crosscountri regress run identifi factor condit converg invest rate macroeconom financi sector institut variabl absolut converg support data condit converg found hold even sampl period evid converg central eastern southeastern europ lend strong support condit converg hypothesi standard growth theori sure acqui communautair structur factor provid common framework countri region engag rapid converg sustain catchingup live standard euro area continu structur converg along line acqui communautair crucial particular candid potenti candid countri howev also featur current catchingup process odd establish growth empir particular sever empir studi suggest converg region seem driven growth total factor product contrast evid found rapid converg economi exampl asia capit accumul identifi main driver real converg advanc economi transit prime candid account anomali heritag central plan left mani economi larg ineffici product offer vast potenti effici gain cours regim shift economi region made extens use potenti nevertheless rais import question sustain converg process futur strong tfp growth main result transit renew sourc converg futur e transit sourc must found one factor effici financi intermedi financi sector brain market economi alloc resourc allow capit flow product use empir literatur financ growth suggest name financi develop signific correl total factor product less privat save rate capit accumul clear financi develop region advanc rapid nonetheless capit accumul expect make larger contribut growth real converg futur howev invest rate rise central eastern southeastern europ particular high emerg market standard compar emerg asia even consid rather low invest rate relat subdu polici pursu foster capit format conceptu polici question may easi answer continu structur reform enhanc flexibl labour product market improv busi climat govern standard respons howev rise invest might contribut widen current account deficit inde recent year invest region increas financ tap foreign save result current account deficit reach level gdp sever countri theoret perspect current account deficit may actual interpret line predict standard theori howev emerg market economi seen opposit pattern name converg accompani improv current account balanc visibl high widen current account surplus emerg asia even strike current account surplus observ parallel increas financi globalis financi globalis facilit capit flow rich poor countri opposit observ known know luca paradox semin articl luca point capit flow emerg advanc economi contradict predict standard model trade growth paradox still observ mani part world result common known global imbal various explan suggest account least seem paradox develop one hand rate return differenti might smaller suggest relat scarciti abund capit reflect larger risk relat higher level uncertainti due less develop legal financi system vice versa lower level institut qualiti mani emerg market economi might result outflow capit lesser opportun financi invest countri central eastern southeastern europ seem special among emerg market process real converg accompani differ current account develop emerg market countri region accumul sizeabl foreign exchang reserv use much foreign save financ current spend financi factor explain current account surplus emerg asia differ impact emerg europ find answer question import squar empir evid theori also polici perspect polici maker get comfort fact imbal central eastern southeastern europ line standard econom theori worri imbal disrupt converg prove unsustain correct pain cost let focus close financi factor region particular bank sector seen peculiar form structur converg financi integr countri bank sector domin subsidiari branch bank headquart euro area similar develop also seen emerg market economi process uniqu emerg europ bank expand presenc perceiv becom singl larg european financi market futur financi deepen region extrem rapid credit growth rate particular high consum mortgag lend reach countri year p worri develop research suggest rapid credit growth necessarili lead financi turbul one main predictor moreov structur credit featur promin loan denomin foreign currenc give reason concern sustain debt burden case econom downturn signific exchang rate depreci speed limit real converg set financi factor bring last point would like deal introductori remark name challeng monetari polici recent demand pressur aris strong credit growth capit inflow reflect rise inflat three reason first strong product growth second current account financ larg fdi serv conveni outlet buoyant demand third near economi still substanti slack labour market nevertheless quick absorb last two year domest demand pressur start increas reflect domest price develop mean countri reach even pass growth potenti evid clearcut strong growth recent year labour utilis remain low hold particip employ rate unemploy even though declin recent still high mani countri thus seem ampl space larger contribut labour growth mitig constraint rise potenti output time labour market region characteris substanti mismatch moreov labour market disequilibria may exacerb signific migrat flow limit suppli respons rise demand least countri result observ paradox low labour utilis tight labour market time theori suggest process rapid real converg countri experi higher overal inflat rate due balassasamuelson effect howev recent rise inflat hard explain effect alon review empir studi size balassasamuelson effect central eastern southeastern european countri suggest effect larg might even declin time would suggest latest increas inflat reflect overh rather catchingup phenomenon keep nomin converg track main polici challeng region problem becom particular acut countri given monetari polici independ choos exchang rate target adopt currenc board arrang key question countri possibl keep inflat control peg exchang rate mean adopt de facto monetari polici euro area especi sinc euro area economi grow rate less third catchingup economi aim achiev word possibl keep inflat control low even time negat real interest rate risk financi stabil persist low real interest rate much lower rate growth economi go detail issu would like recal even advanc economi period low interest rate might fuel financi turbul recent event show sure keep nomin converg track challeng monetari polici also fiscal structur polici improv suppli side condit tight budget certain mitig inflationari pressur stem strong domest demand one nonetheless realist defin requir budgetari incom structur polici consist achiev time real nomin converg guess real question ask larg budget surplus counteract inflationari effect produc procycl monetari polici would accept catchingup countri far reach accept popul structur reform requir budgetari structur polici associ exchang rate link euro might demand counteract procycl effect low real interest rate might lead boom bust cycl potenti sever adjust cost may delay real converg rais sever provoc question launch confer let conclud substanti progress real converg achiev central eastern southeastern europ happen respect real per capita incom also econom structur busi institut environ well macroeconom polici time path catch remain larg fraught risk incom gap euro area signific reduc still larg candid potenti candid countri much remain done also advanc structur converg recent sign overh present signific challeng macroeconom structur polici want open confer rais issu confer programm mind develop next hour analyt well polici perspect wish stimul discuss success confer thank much attent abiad leigh d modi intern financ incom converg europ differ imf work paper intern monetari fund washington adalet m eichengreen b current account revers alway problem prepar nber confer g current account imbal newport rhode island june arcalean c calvogonzalez o móré cs van rixtel winkler zumer caus natur rapid growth bank credit central eastern south eastern european countri charl enoch inci ötkerrob ed rapid credit growth central eastern europ endless boom earli warn palgrav macmillan new york arratibel o heinz f r przybyla m rawdanowicz l serafini r zumer determin growth central eastern european eu member state product function approach ecb occasion paper seri baumol w wolff e n product growth converg welfar repli american econom review vol beck levin r loayza n financ sourc growth journal financi econom berglöf e bolton p great divid beyond financi architectur transit journal econom perspect pp bini smaghi l global imbal monetari polici journal polici model forthcom bussièr m fratzscher m mueller g j current account dynam oecd eu acced countri intertempor approach ecb work paper seri european central bank frankfurt main command kollo j chang demand skill evid transit iza work paper de gregorio j guidotti p e financi develop econom growth imf work paper wp washington d c delong j b summer l h equip invest econom growth quarter journal econom pp dowrick delong j b globalis converg bordo et al ed global histor perspect univers chicago press chicago imf asia rise pattern econom develop growth world econom outlook septemb chapter landesmann m vidov h ward econom restructur labour market develop new eu member state vienna institut intern econom studi leonledesma m nerlich c rupprecht impact real converg inflat new eu member state mimeo levin r financi develop econom growth view agenda journal econom literatur vol xxxv pp luca r e doesn capit flow rich poor countri american econom review vol pp luengnaruemitchai p schadler economist financi market perspect new member eu differ imf work paper march washington dc mankiw n g growth nation brook paper econom activ pp merton r bodi z conceptu framework analys financi environ crane d b ed global financi system function perspect boston harvard busi school press mihaljek d privatis consolid increas role foreign bank bis paper pp moreno r villar increas role foreign bank entri emerg market bis paper pp basel morges bori m polgar e k zlate real converg central eastern southeastern europ ecb mimeo musso westermann assess potenti output growth euro area growth account perspect ecb occasion paper frankfurt main prasad e rajan r subramanian paradox capit financ develop vol intern monetari fund washington pritchett l diverg big time journal econom perspect vol summer pp sach j tornel velascó financi crise emerg market lesson nber work paper w salaimartin x ran two million regress american econom review paper proceed vol pp young tyranni number confront statist realiti east asian growth experi quarter journal econom pp view express note reflect author thank eva katalin polgar adalbert winkler input prepar remark ten eu member bulgaria czech republ estonia hungari latvia lithuania poland romania slovakia slovenia seven candid potenti candid croatia former yugoslav republ macedonia turkey albania bosnia herzegovina montenegro serbia overview see mankiw see pritchett borrow titl paper salaimartin howev could also argu european integr special evid converg europ way except confirm rule diverg line reason develop literatur converg club see exampl baumol wolff dowrick de long see arratibel et al morges bori et al see young imf see merton bodi see exampl de gregorio guidotti beck levin loayza see exampl bussièr et al luca see also prasad et al see bini smaghi answer abiad et al posit one identifi rapid financi integr countri review key factor explain differ emerg market financi market differ countri region emerg market economi also stress luengnaruemitchai schadler bini smaghi see e g adalet eichengreen see arcalean et al see mihaljek moreno villar see berglöf bolton see e g sach et al see landesmann et al command kollo leonledesma et al reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en