Peter Praet: Speech on the occasion of the “Annual Danish Top Executive Summit 2013”,29-01-2013,European Central Bank,ECB,4510,"<p>It is a real pleasure for me to share some thoughts today with such a distinguished group of business leaders. [1] It may strike you as somewhat paradoxical for a central banker to address such an audience in a conference where the main theme is innovative thinking. After all, central bankers have traditionally been stereotyped as conservative and, well, rather dull. I firmly believe, though, that in a constantly changing world, decision-makers need to develop and maintain a healthy degree of scepticism around whether their current strategies and practices remain fit-for-purpose. This holds for decision-makers in business as well as in the public policy domain. And it is particularly relevant for central bankers, who have shouldered large part of the responsibility to navigate the economy through a once-in-a-generation financial and economic crisis.In the first part of my remarks today I will contour some salient features of central banks’ response to the crisis. But I am sure that everyone here today is more interested in the future than pondering on what has been done so far. Indeed, as the macroeconomic and business environment remains challenging, the calls for a rethinking of business models and strategic orientations become more forceful. This is also the case in the monetary policy-making arena, where new strategic aspects are being promoted and debated around the globe. In the second and main part of my remarks I would, therefore, like to focus on two examples of such ‘innovative’ strategic thinking for monetary policy, assessing them from a euro area perspective. The first example concerns the objective of monetary policy. The second one refers to how policy is conducted to deliver the assigned objective.Prompted by the crisis, central bankers globally have thought openly and creatively. They designed and deployed a host of measures that went well beyond their traditional modus operandi. This reaction of central banks has clear parallels to the way business leaders confront challenges. To illustrate this, let me briefly outline how features of central banking practices correspond to the four themes that the organisers of this conference have laid out as relevant for addressing challenges in the corporate world.The first theme is strength. Central banks typically rely on financial markets to transmit their monetary policy intentions to the real economy. During the crisis, dysfunctional segments of financial markets threatened to weaken or completely suppress this process. Central banks addressed these market dislocations in a resolute way, thereby showcasing the strength of the instruments that are at their disposal. Second comes control. Ensuring that the expectations of firms and households regarding future inflation remain well-anchored is of the essence for keeping inflation in check. During the crisis, through words and deeds, central banks have strived to maintain these expectations under control.The third theme is horizon. The most obvious concept of horizon in the context of central banking is that of time-horizon. Both in normal times and in times of crisis, central bankers seek to maintain a medium-term horizon and thus avoid being overwhelmed by short-term considerations. At the same time, central banks have demonstrated a capacity to deploy crisis management measures within a very short time span, when this was necessary.The fourth and final theme of the conference was courage. Again this may sound paradoxical. Central bankers are proverbially prudent and risk averse. But there is a particular type of courage that they need to exhibit: the courage and firm character to stay the course and unwaveringly pursue the assigned mandate, when calls to serve other objectives can be increasingly loud.At the ECB, in particular, our response to the crisis has been two-pronged. The first element has been the swift reduction of our key policy rates to historically low levels in response to the emergence of downside risks to price stability. This is what is considered “standard” monetary policy action. The second element has entailed a host of measures to address dislocations in financial markets that were preventing the permissive monetary policy interest rates to be fully and evenly reflected in the lending conditions faced by households and firms across the euro area. These measures are typically referred to as “non-standard” and were intended to relieve liquidity and funding constraints in the banking sector, as well as unwarranted tail risks. This set of measures, therefore, serves to improve financing conditions over and above what can be achieved through reductions in the key ECB interest rates. In addressing the crisis we have been acutely aware of the need to strike a delicate balance between two sets of competing considerations. On the one hand, central banks were faced with the risk of a financial meltdown, which would have had profound implications for the real economy and which posed a serious threat to price stability. On the other hand, the resolute response of the central bank to the financial crisis relieves the pressure from other actors in the economy to measure up to their own responsibilities, correct the past unsustainable economic course and unwind excesses. This refers not only to governments but also to the private sector. In the past year we have seen significant progress in the European economic governance framework. These changes to the institutional architecture of the EU have been of great importance for restoring the appropriate incentives of the actors involved. Let me now turn to the discussion of ‘innovative’ ideas on strategic aspects of monetary policy. Since the early 1980s, a broad consensus has emerged across advanced economies which has elevated price stability to the main – although not always the sole – objective of monetary policy. Indeed, through the fixed-exchange-rate policy for the krone vis-à-vis the euro, Danmarks Nationalbank is effectively also among the central banks aiming at maintaining price stability. [2] In most cases, the mandate for pursuing price stability has been operationalised by defining a numerical value for inflation that the central bank should aim to deliver. In advanced economies this value is low, typically within a narrow range around 2%.In the wake of the crisis, however, a number of pundits have called for an increase in the inflation rate that central banks should aim for. These calls have originated from diverse sources spanning academia, policy circles and financial markets. [3] Proponents of this approach argue that this is a way to provide more monetary policy stimulus to the economy when nominal short-term interest rates – the instrument typically employed by central banks – cannot be reduced further because they are at zero, or close to zero. The rationale is that a higher inflation objective, if credible, would prompt firms and households to revise their expectations regarding future inflation upwards. By doing so, it would reduce further down real interest rates, which are not necessarily constrained by zero. As real – rather than nominal – interest rates matter for economic decisions such as investment and consumption, this change should promote economic activity. It is therefore argued that switching to a higher numerical aim for inflation will bring about a one-off accommodative effect when it is adopted. Moreover, it is claimed that it will also make it less likely in the future that nominal rates will become constrained by their lower bound.It may not surprise you to hear that I am very sceptical about this proposal, both in general terms and in the euro area context in particular. To explain my concerns, I shall step back for a moment and clarify an aspect of the ECB’s monetary policy framework that is subtle, but in my view important. By contrast to many central banks around the world, the ECB does not practice inflation targeting. The ECB has been mandated by the Treaty (Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union) to maintain price stability over the medium term. The mandate itself does not entail a precise definition of what price stability means in practice. The Governing Council, therefore, decided to identify inflation values consistent with conditions of price stability.Price stability conditions do not necessarily entail stable prices, that is to say zero inflation. Inflation levels which are sufficiently contained to not interfere with economic choices are to be considered indicative of a stable monetary environment, and therefore of price stability. Inflation impinges on a large array of economic activities. [4] For instance, it has an important effect on the way people take decisions about how to allocate resources across time. For example, a household’s decision to consume today or instead save and consume in the future; a worker’s decision to supply labour; or a firm’s decision to invest. Moreover, inflation – especially if it is volatile – creates distortions in the information content of relative prices in the economy. This can lead to incorrect economic decisions if, for instance, firms wrongly interpret a general price increase as a signal of increased demand for their product. It also affects the frequency of changes in businesses’ price tags and menus. Importantly, these effects lead to dead-weight losses and distortions in the allocation of resources and, therefore, to socially sub-optimal economic outcomes.The upshot is that the rate of inflation, above which distortions of economic decision-making start becoming material, is not a matter of policy preference, like an inflation target. Instead, it is a structural feature of the economy. It is linked to aspects such as contract and commercial pricing technologies; the tax and welfare system; and the demographic structure of the population, to name but a few. While these structural features of course can and indeed do change, they do so only very gradually and infrequently. Moreover, the direction and size of the effect of any such changes on the non-distortive inflation rate is not a priori clear. It needs to be thoroughly examined and conclusively proven.Where does this leave us on the proposal to increase the numerical objective pursued by monetary policy? An inflation target can be changed to reflect shifting policy tastes and moving priorities. But a quantitative definition of price stability is a range of inflation values that can be qualified as unproblematic for economic decision-making. And this qualification is a factual statement, not a matter of tactical choice. Changing it on tactical grounds would be opportunistic and would harm the credibility of the central bank. For a central bank like the ECB, wedded to a range of inflation values that can be characterised as indicative of stable prices, a change to this range – and notably to its upper quantitative limit – is not conceivable barring analysis that convincingly argues for a wider range and larger values. A change not justified on these bases would create permanent damage to our ability to steer inflation expectations and contain inflation volatility. A loss of credibility can lead to an overshooting of inflation expectations. This would require a disproportionate withdrawal of monetary policy accommodation in the future to reign in inflation. Any initial boost to economic activity will therefore ultimately be more than reversed. Additional and unnecessary volatility in real activity would be the price to pay. In any case, it seems to me that the trade-off implied by this proposal is rather lopsided. Even if the central bank is successful in engineering precisely the intended permissive conditions as measured by a real interest rate decline, it is far from clear that this would indeed generate real effects even in the short-term. If, for instance, there are quantitative constraints in the availability of credit at play in the economy, the lower short-term real rates will fail to stimulate aggregate demand. Overall, therefore, one risks trading very uncertain gains – in terms of immediate policy accommodation – against rather certain costs – in terms of higher inflation, possibly for an indefinite period. Such risk-payoff structures are perfectly acceptable in the business world. Indeed taking calculated risks is often the mark of a successful business leader. For public policy, however, this strikes me as a deal that should not be made.But for some of the proponents of increasing the central bank’s inflation objective this proposal is not motivated by a perceived need to stimulate aggregate demand when nominal interest rates are at zero or close to zero. Instead, they focus on another feature of the crisis: balance sheet adjustment in order to address the over-indebtedness problem. According to this argument, a higher inflation objective makes it less likely that the economy may get trapped in a destructive debt-deflation spiral of the type described by Irving Fisher. In the midst of the Great Depression, Fisher put forward a theory of economic crises that centred on the mutually reinforcing effects between over-indebtedness and deflation. [5] According to this view, over-indebtedness beyond some point triggers distressed asset sales as debt is called in. This leads to abrupt deleveraging and a contraction of the amount of money in circulation. The destruction of money precipitates a fall in the general price level. Deflation in turn causes the real debt and interest burden to go up, thereby triggering a new bout of distressed asset sales and deleveraging and trapping the economy in a vicious circle.Deflation poses risks to the economy that – in some respects – are even more intractable than inflation. It is for this reason that the Governing Council’s definition of price stability rules out negative inflation values. Moreover, the Governing Council’s policy aim (within the range of positive inflation rates that are consistent with price stability) is sufficiently close to the upper bound of the range to stave off the risk that negative price shocks may unleash a self-reinforcing downward inflation spiral. But engineering financial repression in order to facilitate balance sheet adjustment would clearly violate the mandate to maintain price stability as a primary objective conferred upon the ECB by the Treaty.Earlier in my remarks I referred to the central bank’s steering of inflation expectations as an illustration of the notion of control. Moreover, I mentioned that the steadfast pursuit of the central bank’s mandate exemplifies the notion of courage. I am very sceptical whether increasing the numerical definition of price stability helps in either of these dimensions.Let me now turn to the second example of an innovative proposal for monetary policy that I would like to discuss today. Unlike the previous proposal, this one does not relate to the objective of the central bank. Instead, it focuses on how the central bank can actually achieve its assigned objective, when the chances that the objective will be hit diminish. As I already mentioned, central banks typically conduct monetary policy by steering nominal short-term interest rates. These are the rates over which they can exert significant influence through the monopoly supply of central bank reserves. It is, however, widely accepted that it is primarily long-term interest rates that matter for the main economic decisions that the central bank wants to influence. How is it then that monetary policy can have an impact on the economy? Well, one can think of long-term interest rates as comprising two elements: expectations regarding the future evolution of short-term rates; and premia. Premia relate to the compensation investors demand for holding on to an asset for a specific period of time (the term premium). Moreover, they relate to the compensation for risks, such as the possibility of incurring capital losses due to difficulties they may encounter when selling the asset back to the market before maturity and at short notice (the liquidity premium). Changes in the current policy rate are typically interpreted by markets to also signal changes for short-term rates in the future. That is, they affect market expectations for future short-term rates and therefore, long-term rates.In normal times, this signalling channel works well and market expectations tend to be in line with monetary policy makers’ intended long-term rates. When, however, short-term nominal rates are at zero or close to zero, this signalling channel loses its potency. The risk is that long-term rates may drift away from the central bank’s intended path, in which case financing conditions in the economy will not properly reflect the stance of monetary policy. Some academic economists have advocated that, particularly in such a situation, the central bank should engage in active communication regarding the future path of policy rates. [6] This communication would serve as a commitment device for the central bank to follow in the future the announced path of short-term rates, possibly conditional on actual developments in the economy. [7] If this commitment is sufficiently credible, it will be effective in steering expectations regarding future interest rates and so influence the first component of long-term interest rates to which I was referring before. This is turn, will allow the central bank to deliver accommodative financing conditions in the economy over a certain horizon. A number of central banks around the world – most recently including the US Federal Reserve – have adopted some version of this approach.But the decomposition of long-term rates I mentioned a few moments ago suggests that there is also another possible way for the central bank to deliver appropriate financing conditions in the economy. This second approach is to exert influence on the premia, to the extent that they are unwarranted and reflect dislocations in markets. I would argue that the assessment regarding which approach is more appropriate depends on the particular situation each monetary policy maker faces. The approach focusing on communication regarding the future path of short-term interest rates is in principle applicable to a situation where there is a need to provide general, across the board, stimulus to the economy. Moreover, it applies in currency areas where financing conditions are more or less homogeneous throughout segments of the financial market and of the currency space. By this I mean a situation in which following a reduction in the array of risk-free interest rates, firms or households with comparable characteristics experience a broadly similar decrease in the borrowing rates they are charged for finance.Despite the notable improvements recently, this by and large is not the situation we are facing in the euro area. Domestic financial conditions across euro area countries remain fragmented. The spreads that lenders apply over benchmark rates are very uneven and, in some countries, abnormally high, reflecting dysfunctional market dynamics. Moreover, there is no uncontroversial way to define the term structure of the risk-free rate in the euro area. Unlike economies with a single fiscal authority or with a fully-fledged federal structure, the euro area comprises multiple sovereign states. The debt of each of these states has different liquidity and risk characteristics. Under these circumstances, it strikes me as far more appropriate to encourage conditions for a more even distribution of the very permissive liquidity provision that is in place. Engaging in promises regarding the future monetary policy stance would not be the most effective instrument for achieving this. Instead, we need to continue addressing the part of the premia in long-term rates in the euro area that is not warranted. But let me be clear, this does not mean that monetary policy instruments should be used to reduce credit spreads that reflect well-founded concerns regarding long-term debt sustainability and competitiveness. Is this alternative approach effective? In a nutshell I would say that the arsenal of the ECB’s instruments for monetary policy implementation continues to be able to induce relaxation of conditions in term borrowing, when this is deemed necessary. In particular, the very long tenor of some of our refinancing operations combined with the full accommodation of banks’ demand for such refinancing at the prevailing rate has proven to be very powerful. Indeed, this has been effective in lowering rates along the yield curve, without having to engage in commitments on the future stance of monetary policy to steer expectations. By providing security to our bank counterparties that central bank credit will remain in place for a sufficiently long horizon, we have acted on the liquidity premium component of term interest rates: the spread that remunerates banks lending in the inter-bank market for the risk that their borrowing counterpart may become illiquid and unable to honour the inter-bank credit contract at maturity. This added degree of comfort has encouraged market activity at decreasing term lending rates. But I do not want to imply that the approach that the ECB has followed thus far is free of pitfalls. For instance, the use of refinancing operations with a very long maturity results in an immediate expansion of the balance sheet when implemented. Such an expansion is not without challenges for central bank communication and for managing inflation expectations. Moreover, it has the unintended side-effect that it increases the encumbrance of banks’ balance sheets. That is, it increases the share of bank assets that are already pledged as collateral, and thus unavailable to support the borrower’s standing in additional credit operations. The share of bank assets that would be available to cover the claims of unsecured creditors in case of a default shrinks. This, in turn, amplifies the perceived loss given default of additional claimants and makes it more difficult for banks to access the unsecured money markets, which in normal times is the main market for marginal bank funding. We are fully aware of this risk and this is part of the reason that we have allowed for early repayment of our 3-year long-term refinancing operations. This way, when a counterparty judges that its chances of accessing market funding are being constrained by its use of ECB 3-year long-term refinancing operations, it can repay all or part of the amount borrowed earlier than its original maturity. In fact, tomorrow is the first opportunity to make use of the early repayment option. Euro area banks have taken this opportunity and have informed us that they will repay €137 billion of the slightly more than €1 trillion outstanding in such long-term operations. We will exert vigilance to ensure that – notwithstanding the legitimate decisions of individual banks to reduce their liabilities to the central bank – the overall liquidity conditions prevailing in the money market will remain consistent with the degree of accommodation that the current outlook for prices and real activity warrant.Whichever of the two approaches a central bank decides to use, it needs to be well appreciated that there are limits to what monetary policy alone can achieve. Delivering accommodative financing conditions and ample liquidity to the banking system has been necessary to avoid an abrupt deleveraging that could tip the economy into a destructive deflationary spiral. But parts of the banking system remain overstretched and this needs to be addressed in order to move decisively out of the crisis. Similarly, structural reforms need to be undertaken in order to restore the competitiveness of euro area economies. Only such reforms can deliver a lasting reversal of the fragmentation phenomena that the euro area has witnessed. And clearly neither of these tasks can be taken up by monetary policy.Let me conclude with a cautionary tale. Innovation is the quintessence of entrepreneurship and a cornerstone for economic growth and prosperity in market-based economies. But there can be innovations that create more problems than the ones they were originally conceived to address.I am reminded of the two mortal sins of economic policy-making that clearly transpire when reading Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff’s excellent book on financial crises: arrogance and ignorance. [8] Transposing this insight to the discussion on monetary policy frameworks, I would say that it is dangerously arrogant to believe that one’s current approach to monetary policy is perfect and no improvements or changes will ever be needed. Certainly, before the crisis, a certain degree of academic group thinking and central bank professional hubris bred a sense of accomplishment that proved exceedingly complacent and ultimately self-defeating. Looking forward, we should temper a tendency to self-complacency – if not arrogance – with the strength of thought and the courage of vision. But courage and vision should not entice us into hazardous experimentations. We should not be ignorant of the lessons that history has taught. And history has shown that inflation was permanently brought under control when the public’s inflation expectations became safely anchored. This in turn occurred when central banks gained credibility regarding their determination to stabilise inflation. This credibility was hard-earned but can be eroded easily. It would be irresponsible to jeopardise it.As regards the ECB in particular, I am convinced that our existing monetary policy framework provides enough scope for instruments to continue addressing the crisis in a decisive and effective way. We remain attentive to possible shortcomings in our policy framework and to changes in the structure of the economy that would warrant revisiting aspects of this framework. At present, however, I see no compelling case for change.Thank you very much for your attention.[1]I would like to thank Thomas Vlassopoulos for his contribution to the preparation of this speech.[2]Danmarks Nationalbank, Monetary Policy in Denmark, 3rd edition, Danmarks Nationalbank, Copenhagen, 2009.[3]In academia the recommendation for a higher inflation rate objective in a low nominal interest rate environment predates the current crisis, see P. Krugman, “It's Baaack: Japan's Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 1998, reformulated more recently in G. Eggertsson and P. Krugman, “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 127 (3), 2012, pp. 1469-1513. A similar recommendation has been put forward by IMF staff, see O. Blanchard, G. Dell’ Ariccia and P. Mauro, “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy”, IMF Staff Position Note, SPN/10/03, 2010. An example of an endorsement of this proposal by financial market participants is provided in M. Pradhan, The Global Monetary Analyst: Debt Dominance, Mandates and the Impossible Puzzle, Morgan Stanley Research, 31 October 2012. [4]For surveys of the literature on the costs of inflation, see O. Issing, “Why price stability?”, in: A.G. Herrero, V. Gaspar, L. Hoogduin, J. Morgan and B. Winkler (eds.), Why price stability?, First ECB Central Banking Conference, European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 2001 and G. Camba-Mendez, J.A. Garcia and D. Rodriguez Palenzuela, “Relevant economic issues concerning the optimal rate of inflation”, in O. Issing (ed.), Background studies for the ECB’s Evaluation of its Monetary Policy Strategy, European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 2003. [5]I. Fisher, “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions”, Econometrica, vol. 1(4), 1933, pp. 337-357.[6]The argument was originally made in P. Krugman, op. cit. It was presented in a more formal way in G. Eggertsson and M. Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 2003, pp. 139-233 and, more recently, in M. Woodford, “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound”, paper presented at the Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, “The Changing Policy Landscape”, August 31 - September 1, 2012.[7]The commitment mechanism is necessary due to the time-inconsistency problem inherent in such a situation, i.e. the incentive for the central bank to ex post renege on this promise. See F. Kydland and E. Prescott, “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans”, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 85(3), 1977, pp. 473-492.[8]C. Reinhart and K. Rogoff, This time is different: Eight centuries of financial folly, Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford, 2009.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",real pleasur share thought today distinguish group busi leader may strike somewhat paradox central banker address audienc confer main theme innov think central banker tradit stereotyp conserv well rather dull firm believ though constant chang world decisionmak need develop maintain healthi degre sceptic around whether current strategi practic remain fitforpurpos hold decisionmak busi well public polici domain particular relev central banker shoulder larg part respons navig economi onceinagener financi econom crisi first part remark today contour salient featur central bank respons crisi sure everyon today interest futur ponder done far inde macroeconom busi environ remain challeng call rethink busi model strateg orient becom forc also case monetari policymak arena new strateg aspect promot debat around globe second main part remark would therefor like focus two exampl innov strateg think monetari polici assess euro area perspect first exampl concern object monetari polici second one refer polici conduct deliv assign object prompt crisi central banker global thought open creativ design deploy host measur went well beyond tradit modus operandi reaction central bank clear parallel way busi leader confront challeng illustr let briefli outlin featur central bank practic correspond four theme organis confer laid relev address challeng corpor world first theme strength central bank typic reli financi market transmit monetari polici intent real economi crisi dysfunct segment financi market threaten weaken complet suppress process central bank address market disloc resolut way therebi showcas strength instrument dispos second come control ensur expect firm household regard futur inflat remain wellanchor essenc keep inflat check crisi word deed central bank strive maintain expect control third theme horizon obvious concept horizon context central bank timehorizon normal time time crisi central banker seek maintain mediumterm horizon thus avoid overwhelm shortterm consider time central bank demonstr capac deploy crisi manag measur within short time span necessari fourth final theme confer courag may sound paradox central banker proverbi prudent risk avers particular type courag need exhibit courag firm charact stay cours unwav pursu assign mandat call serv object increas loud ecb particular respons crisi twoprong first element swift reduct key polici rate histor low level respons emerg downsid risk price stabil consid standard monetari polici action second element entail host measur address disloc financi market prevent permiss monetari polici interest rate fulli even reflect lend condit face household firm across euro area measur typic refer nonstandard intend reliev liquid fund constraint bank sector well unwarr tail risk set measur therefor serv improv financ condit achiev reduct key ecb interest rate address crisi acut awar need strike delic balanc two set compet consider one hand central bank face risk financi meltdown would profound implic real economi pose serious threat price stabil hand resolut respons central bank financi crisi reliev pressur actor economi measur respons correct past unsustain econom cours unwind excess refer govern also privat sector past year seen signific progress european econom govern framework chang institut architectur eu great import restor appropri incent actor involv let turn discuss innov idea strateg aspect monetari polici sinc earli broad consensus emerg across advanc economi elev price stabil main although alway sole object monetari polici inde fixedexchanger polici krone visàvi euro danmark nationalbank effect also among central bank aim maintain price stabil case mandat pursu price stabil operationalis defin numer valu inflat central bank aim deliv advanc economi valu low typic within narrow rang around wake crisi howev number pundit call increas inflat rate central bank aim call origin divers sourc span academia polici circl financi market propon approach argu way provid monetari polici stimulus economi nomin shortterm interest rate instrument typic employ central bank cannot reduc zero close zero rational higher inflat object credibl would prompt firm household revis expect regard futur inflat upward would reduc real interest rate necessarili constrain zero real rather nomin interest rate matter econom decis invest consumpt chang promot econom activ therefor argu switch higher numer aim inflat bring oneoff accommod effect adopt moreov claim also make less like futur nomin rate becom constrain lower bound may surpris hear sceptic propos general term euro area context particular explain concern shall step back moment clarifi aspect ecb monetari polici framework subtl view import contrast mani central bank around world ecb practic inflat target ecb mandat treati treati function european union maintain price stabil medium term mandat entail precis definit price stabil mean practic govern council therefor decid identifi inflat valu consist condit price stabil price stabil condit necessarili entail stabl price say zero inflat inflat level suffici contain interfer econom choic consid indic stabl monetari environ therefor price stabil inflat imping larg array econom activ instanc import effect way peopl take decis alloc resourc across time exampl household decis consum today instead save consum futur worker decis suppli labour firm decis invest moreov inflat especi volatil creat distort inform content relat price economi lead incorrect econom decis instanc firm wrong interpret general price increas signal increas demand product also affect frequenc chang busi price tag menus import effect lead deadweight loss distort alloc resourc therefor social suboptim econom outcom upshot rate inflat distort econom decisionmak start becom materi matter polici prefer like inflat target instead structur featur economi link aspect contract commerci price technolog tax welfar system demograph structur popul name structur featur cours inde chang gradual infrequ moreov direct size effect chang nondistort inflat rate priori clear need thorough examin conclus proven leav us propos increas numer object pursu monetari polici inflat target chang reflect shift polici tast move prioriti quantit definit price stabil rang inflat valu qualifi unproblemat econom decisionmak qualif factual statement matter tactic choic chang tactic ground would opportunist would harm credibl central bank central bank like ecb wed rang inflat valu characteris indic stabl price chang rang notabl upper quantit limit conceiv bar analysi convinc argu wider rang larger valu chang justifi base would creat perman damag abil steer inflat expect contain inflat volatil loss credibl lead overshoot inflat expect would requir disproportion withdraw monetari polici accommod futur reign inflat initi boost econom activ therefor ultim revers addit unnecessari volatil real activ would price pay case seem tradeoff impli propos rather lopsid even central bank success engin precis intend permiss condit measur real interest rate declin far clear would inde generat real effect even shortterm instanc quantit constraint avail credit play economi lower shortterm real rate fail stimul aggreg demand overal therefor one risk trade uncertain gain term immedi polici accommod rather certain cost term higher inflat possibl indefinit period riskpayoff structur perfect accept busi world inde take calcul risk often mark success busi leader public polici howev strike deal made propon increas central bank inflat object propos motiv perceiv need stimul aggreg demand nomin interest rate zero close zero instead focus anoth featur crisi balanc sheet adjust order address overindebted problem accord argument higher inflat object make less like economi may get trap destruct debtdefl spiral type describ irv fisher midst great depress fisher put forward theori econom crise centr mutual reinforc effect overindebted deflat accord view overindebted beyond point trigger distress asset sale debt call lead abrupt deleverag contract amount money circul destruct money precipit fall general price level deflat turn caus real debt interest burden go therebi trigger new bout distress asset sale deleverag trap economi vicious circl deflat pose risk economi respect even intract inflat reason govern council definit price stabil rule negat inflat valu moreov govern council polici aim within rang posit inflat rate consist price stabil suffici close upper bound rang stave risk negat price shock may unleash selfreinforc downward inflat spiral engin financi repress order facilit balanc sheet adjust would clear violat mandat maintain price stabil primari object confer upon ecb treati earlier remark refer central bank steer inflat expect illustr notion control moreov mention steadfast pursuit central bank mandat exemplifi notion courag sceptic whether increas numer definit price stabil help either dimens let turn second exampl innov propos monetari polici would like discuss today unlik previous propos one relat object central bank instead focus central bank actual achiev assign object chanc object hit diminish alreadi mention central bank typic conduct monetari polici steer nomin shortterm interest rate rate exert signific influenc monopoli suppli central bank reserv howev wide accept primarili longterm interest rate matter main econom decis central bank want influenc monetari polici impact economi well one think longterm interest rate compris two element expect regard futur evolut shortterm rate premia premia relat compens investor demand hold asset specif period time term premium moreov relat compens risk possibl incur capit loss due difficulti may encount sell asset back market matur short notic liquid premium chang current polici rate typic interpret market also signal chang shortterm rate futur affect market expect futur shortterm rate therefor longterm rate normal time signal channel work well market expect tend line monetari polici maker intend longterm rate howev shortterm nomin rate zero close zero signal channel lose potenc risk longterm rate may drift away central bank intend path case financ condit economi proper reflect stanc monetari polici academ economist advoc particular situat central bank engag activ communic regard futur path polici rate communic would serv commit devic central bank follow futur announc path shortterm rate possibl condit actual develop economi commit suffici credibl effect steer expect regard futur interest rate influenc first compon longterm interest rate refer turn allow central bank deliv accommod financ condit economi certain horizon number central bank around world recent includ us feder reserv adopt version approach decomposit longterm rate mention moment ago suggest also anoth possibl way central bank deliv appropri financ condit economi second approach exert influenc premia extent unwarr reflect disloc market would argu assess regard approach appropri depend particular situat monetari polici maker face approach focus communic regard futur path shortterm interest rate principl applic situat need provid general across board stimulus economi moreov appli currenc area financ condit less homogen throughout segment financi market currenc space mean situat follow reduct array riskfre interest rate firm household compar characterist experi broad similar decreas borrow rate charg financ despit notabl improv recent larg situat face euro area domest financi condit across euro area countri remain fragment spread lender appli benchmark rate uneven countri abnorm high reflect dysfunct market dynam moreov uncontroversi way defin term structur riskfre rate euro area unlik economi singl fiscal author fullyfledg feder structur euro area compris multipl sovereign state debt state differ liquid risk characterist circumst strike far appropri encourag condit even distribut permiss liquid provis place engag promis regard futur monetari polici stanc would effect instrument achiev instead need continu address part premia longterm rate euro area warrant let clear mean monetari polici instrument use reduc credit spread reflect wellfound concern regard longterm debt sustain competit altern approach effect nutshel would say arsenal ecb instrument monetari polici implement continu abl induc relax condit term borrow deem necessari particular long tenor refinanc oper combin full accommod bank demand refinanc prevail rate proven power inde effect lower rate along yield curv without engag commit futur stanc monetari polici steer expect provid secur bank counterparti central bank credit remain place suffici long horizon act liquid premium compon term interest rate spread remuner bank lend interbank market risk borrow counterpart may becom illiquid unabl honour interbank credit contract matur ad degre comfort encourag market activ decreas term lend rate want impli approach ecb follow thus far free pitfal instanc use refinanc oper long matur result immedi expans balanc sheet implement expans without challeng central bank communic manag inflat expect moreov unintend sideeffect increas encumbr bank balanc sheet increas share bank asset alreadi pledg collater thus unavail support borrow stand addit credit oper share bank asset would avail cover claim unsecur creditor case default shrink turn amplifi perceiv loss given default addit claimant make difficult bank access unsecur money market normal time main market margin bank fund fulli awar risk part reason allow earli repay year longterm refinanc oper way counterparti judg chanc access market fund constrain use ecb year longterm refinanc oper repay part amount borrow earlier origin matur fact tomorrow first opportun make use earli repay option euro area bank taken opportun inform us repay billion slight trillion outstand longterm oper exert vigil ensur notwithstand legitim decis individu bank reduc liabil central bank overal liquid condit prevail money market remain consist degre accommod current outlook price real activ warrant whichev two approach central bank decid use need well appreci limit monetari polici alon achiev deliv accommod financ condit ampl liquid bank system necessari avoid abrupt deleverag could tip economi destruct deflationari spiral part bank system remain overstretch need address order move decis crisi similar structur reform need undertaken order restor competit euro area economi reform deliv last revers fragment phenomena euro area wit clear neither task taken monetari polici let conclud cautionari tale innov quintess entrepreneurship cornerston econom growth prosper marketbas economi innov creat problem one origin conceiv address remind two mortal sin econom policymak clear transpir read carmen reinhart kenneth rogoff excel book financi crise arrog ignor transpos insight discuss monetari polici framework would say danger arrog believ one current approach monetari polici perfect improv chang ever need certain crisi certain degre academ group think central bank profession hubri bred sens accomplish prove exceed complac ultim selfdef look forward temper tendenc selfcomplac arrog strength thought courag vision courag vision entic us hazard experiment ignor lesson histori taught histori shown inflat perman brought control public inflat expect becam safe anchor turn occur central bank gain credibl regard determin stabilis inflat credibl hardearn erod easili would irrespons jeopardis regard ecb particular convinc exist monetari polici framework provid enough scope instrument continu address crisi decis effect way remain attent possibl shortcom polici framework chang structur economi would warrant revisit aspect framework present howev see compel case chang thank much attent would like thank thoma vlassopoulo contribut prepar speech danmark nationalbank monetari polici denmark rd edit danmark nationalbank copenhagen academia recommend higher inflat rate object low nomin interest rate environ predat current crisi see p krugman baaack japan slump return liquid trap brook paper econom activ reformul recent g eggertsson p krugman debt deleverag liquid trap fisherminskykoo approach quarter journal econom vol pp similar recommend put forward imf staff see o blanchard g dell ariccia p mauro rethink macroeconom polici imf staff posit note spn exampl endors propos financi market particip provid m pradhan global monetari analyst debt domin mandat imposs puzzl morgan stanley research octob survey literatur cost inflat see o iss price stabil g herrero v gaspar l hoogduin j morgan b winkler ed price stabil first ecb central bank confer european central bank frankfurt main g cambamendez j garcia d rodriguez palenzuela relev econom issu concern optim rate inflat o iss ed background studi ecb evalu monetari polici strategi european central bank frankfurt main fisher debtdefl theori great depress econometrica vol pp argument origin made p krugman op cit present formal way g eggertsson m woodford zero bound interest rate optim monetari polici brook paper econom activ pp recent m woodford method polici accommod interestr lower bound paper present jackson hole econom polici symposium feder reserv bank kansa citi chang polici landscap august septemb commit mechan necessari due timeinconsist problem inher situat e incent central bank ex post reneg promis see f kydland e prescott rule rather discret inconsist optim plan journal polit economi vol pp c reinhart k rogoff time differ eight centuri financi folli princeton univers press princeton oxford reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en