Jean-Claude Trichet: Restoring confidence in the global financial system,17-04-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,3010,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,I am honoured to be invited to address the Naigai Josei Chousa Kai. Today I would like to share with you my views on the roots of the current financial crisis, and the policy responses which aim to address it and to inspire a new sense of direction. The G-20, at its meeting a fortnight ago, sent a strong signal of reform that can provide the basis for a more resilient and stable global economy, in the period to come. Swift implementation of this important agenda will be key. I will explain the ECB’s response to the financial crisis. I will also note, en passant, how our policy compares with those of other major central banks. In my view, differences in crisis management approaches between major central banks reflect differences in economic structures rather than conflicting views on fundamental principles. The ECB’s guiding principles are very simple and very clear. In the medium term, the ECB’s policy is geared towards preserving price stability in line with our objective and in so doing, creating the conditions for enduring financial stability. This policy is essential to revive a resource that has become much too scarce over recent months: confidence in the future.In the last ten years finance has seen a dramatic shift of focus away from facilitating trade and real investment to unfettered speculation and financial gambling. The assumption and hedging of genuine economic risk – the risk that companies face when engaged in product and process innovation – gradually ceased to be the main concern of international finance. Over time, the creation and assumption of financial risk became the core activity of the financial industry. This is the risk posed by arbitrage and deliberate exposure to asset price changes. It reached a point where it seemed that the financial system no longer existed primarily to hedge existing economic risks, but, increasingly, to create and propagate new risks on its own. In the past two decades financial innovation and liberalisation have made important contributions to the overall productivity of our economies. But, as the demand for finance increased throughout the 1990s, intermediaries had growing incentives to develop innovative funding techniques. The securitisation of assets, for example – the transformation of bilateral loans into tradable credit instruments – had tremendous ability to facilitate the diversification and efficient management of risk. As such, it was a powerful and useful tool. But securitisation also meant that banks and non-banks were able to sell loans – or place them off-balance sheet – immediately after they had been extended. This alchemy enabled lenders to expand the volume of their operations and conserve on capital. Fatally, the same mechanism weakened lenders’ incentives for prudent screening and constant monitoring. The resulting decline in underwriting standards and lending oversight was one of the main reasons for the excessive credit growth.The credit boom was exacerbated by three factors. First, ill-designed compensation schemes for loan managers reinforced the shortening of lenders’ horizons. In the eyes of many loan managers, the short-run gains from an expansion of credit outweighed the need to consider the potential losses that their institutions could incur over the longer term. Second, the complex structures of securitised products made it difficult for holders to assess the quality of the underlying investments. This perpetuated the boom, as it took time for investors to discover and assess the underlying risks. Third, international macroeconomic imbalances reflected a chronic shortage of savings in some of the world’s advanced economies, made possible by a glut of savings in other parts of the world. These imbalances resulted from unbalanced international macroeconomic policies pursuing an inconsistent set of goals. These imbalances also contributed to the augmentation of global liquidity, further fuelling credit and debt accumulation. In the period before the start of the crisis, the oil and commodity price boom further fuelled the international savings glut and aggravated major imbalances.The interplay of the forces and the facilitating factors that I have described so far went into reverse in the middle of 2007. This reversal was sudden, but not unexpected. When the asset cycle turned, and many of the missing links in the financial chain were finally exposed, investors lost confidence. After years of high profits and exceptional risk tolerance, markets became extremely discriminating with regard to financial risks. Funding costs for borrowers increased. The spreads on the debt of financial companies – seen as being clogged with assets of dubious value – widened considerably. Uncertainty over the extent of credit write-offs and the future earnings capacity of financial institutions took a heavy toll on the valuation of many revered names.Central banks around the globe had to spring into action in the summer of 2007 when there were signs of what appeared at the time to be a liquidity crisis. You might remember that the ECB was the first central bank to embark on exceptional decisions as early as 9 August 2007. The collapse of a major, highly interconnected financial player in mid-September 2008 eventually turned a very large-scale financial market’s correction into a financial panic. Throughout the difficult months that followed, central banks and governments around the globe took unprecedented and bold steps. These steps were aimed at restoring financial market functioning and the flow of credit, and at ensuring that our banks have the capital and the liquidity necessary to discharge their critical function even in an acute economic downturn.Before going into detail, allow me to say that the crisis has brought out the best in terms of international cooperation. Leading central banks around the globe, including the Bank of Japan and the ECB, have cooperated intimately to alleviate financing strains in interbank markets. Governor Shirakawa and I had numerous useful exchanges of views on the sidelines of our regular meetings at the G-7, G-20 levels and, more importantly, in the occasion of the global economy meeting of central bank governors which takes place every two months in Basel. In the language of game theory, one could say that major central banks are closely cooperating to deliver the best possible outcome for the global economy.Similarly, the outcome of the G-20 meeting a fortnight ago has confirmed that governments can agree on a future course for policy that is based on unity of purpose and shared principles of action. Decisive and immediate action is still required. In my view, progress on three fronts will be critical to restore confidence. Two are geared to the medium term; one is geared to the short term. First, we need a quantum leap in the breadth and authority of international financial supervision and regulation. Any viable and effective solution will necessarily require broadening the focus and overcoming the fragmentation of domestic oversight arrangements. Second, lasting confidence can only be restored if the commitment to near-term fiscal and monetary stimulus is backed by an equally strong and credible commitment to fiscal sustainability and price stability. The importance of this point cannot be overstated. Third, governments need to swiftly implement the far-reaching set of measures, designed to support the financial system. With fellow governors, Governor Shirakawa has convincingly argued that resolute action to put commercial banks in a healthy situation was absolutely indispensable in the experience of Japan at the beginning of the millennium. In the absence of such action, there is a risk that fiscal stimulus packages will simply trickle away, leaving us burdened with the full load of outsized fiscal liabilities and with no prospect of a sustained economic recovery.How far has Europe advanced on these issues? With regard to financial supervision and regulation, the European Union is currently preparing important decisions along the lines recommended by the De Larosière report. Among other things, this report proposes a new system for macro-prudential supervision in which the General Council of the ECB would play an important role. There was certainly no lack of warnings – from many quarters – before the crisis. But no mechanism or institution existed to ensure that admonitions were followed by decisive and swift action. The new European system would assign the task of pre-emptive analysis and grant the necessary authority to put risk mitigation measures into practice.With regard to the appropriate balance between near-term stimulus and medium-term stability, the euro area clearly benefits from its medium-term stability-oriented framework. It is an invaluable anchor for private sector expectations, regarding both fiscal sustainability and price stability. Having proved its value in times of crisis, this framework has emerged even stronger than before. With regard to the overall support to the financial sector, I have been deeply impressed by the action plan drawn up by euro area governments and the European Commission within a short period of time. This action plan and its swift implementation has confounded the sceptics who had questioned the ability of euro area governments to act in a timely fashion in the event of a major economic crisis. Nevertheless, more action is urgently needed to entirely resolve the toxic asset problem.Let me now turn in more detail to the ECB’s management of the financial crisis. When the first signs of liquidity hoarding by banks appeared in August 2007, the ECB took several measures to protect against a disorderly correction in credit. Banks were not only concerned about the volume of liquidity that they could secure at present, but also about the horizon at which liquidity was expected to remain available to them. So the first thing we did was to provide banks with an insurance against future liquidity shortfalls. We lengthened the liquidity horizon for banks by expanding the share of refinancing that was granted at maturities longer than two weeks. This “insurance scheme” encouraged banks to maintain those lending relations with their clients that are central to Europe’s financial architecture. At the same time, it helped bolster public confidence that banks would remain solvent. The financial panic that developed in mid-September 2008 marked a dramatic turning point. Interbank trading in the euro area and elsewhere came to a virtual halt. As cash-rich banks were unwilling or unable to lend to cash-deficient institutions, the ECB had to substitute for the missing interbank trading. We started to provide credit well above the levels that banks had absorbed to fulfil their reserve requirements in normal times. Since October, against a background of a drastic deterioration in global conditions, falling commodity prices and rapidly receding inflationary pressures, the ECB has stepped up its crisis resolution measures in an extraordinary effort to protect the functioning of our financial system and the stability of our economies. Again, our primary concern was to preserve the availability of credit for households and companies at accessible rates. Under our new “fixed-rate full allotment” tender procedure, banks have been granted access to essentially unlimited liquidity at our policy interest rate. To fully appreciate what this means, one should note that in normal times we auction a given amount of central bank credit and let competition among bidders determine the interest rate at which that credit will become available to the banking system as a whole. But, as the demand for liquidity by individual institutions has expended abnormally and markets have ceased to perform their allocative function, we have turned that practice around. We now determine the lending rate and we stand ready to fill any shortage of liquidity that might occur at that interest rate. We currently surrogate the market in both its allocative and price discovery functions. We have also considerably lengthened the list of eligible assets that banks can pledge as collateral, so as to ease banks’ balance sheet constraints and facilitate the liquefaction of bank assets for which markets could find no price. The intention was to encourage banks to extend new credit or continue rolling over maturing loans. Traditionally, the number of counterparties that are eligible to take part in our refinancing operations – both ordinary and long-term – has been the largest among the major central banks that are most directly comparable to the Eurosystem. This structural feature of our operational framework has been instrumental in the first stages of the crisis in ensuring that all relevant intermediaries could be granted easy access to liquidity. The recent changes to our operational framework have expanded the number further. Between July 2007 and March 2009, counterparties have increased from 1676 to 2136. We have granted unlimited access to central bank credit at a decreasing cost. Our key policy rate has been reduced by 300 basis points since the exacerbation of the crisis in the autumn of last year. As I speak, the Eurosystem provides refinancing to all commercial banks that present eligible collateral at a rate of 1.25%. Sound and creditworthy banks can secure overnight credit at an interest rate that is significantly lower, today 0.8%, something never seen before in the entire post-war history of European monetary affairs. Being able to borrow at such low costs, banks can grant credit to other banks and to non-bank borrowers at conditions that are very favourable by historical and international standards. For example, the 6-month and 12-month euro interbank offered rate – benchmarks that euro area banks widely use to reset floating-rate loans to households and firms – have reached levels that are lower than the corresponding rates for contracts denominated in dollar and British pounds. This underscores that in current circumstances international comparisons of policy rates alone do not provide all the pertinent information about the effective credit conditions prevailing in single markets. Our measures to support credit have resulted in a sharp expansion of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet. As banks’ usage of central bank credit soared at the height of the crisis late last year, the value of our operations grew quickly. Between June 2007 and March 2009 the size of our balance sheet increased by close to €600 billion. Since the end of September 2008 the growth in the overall size of our operations has been 40%. These measures have likely prevented the whole credit market from seizing up. Since then, the volume has declined somewhat, as banks have been more conservative in bidding for central bank credit and strains in the money market have eased to a certain extent.The ECB has so far concentrated its non-standard measures on commercial banks’ refinancing, mainly because of the nature of the euro area financial structures. As compared to the United States, which have primarily a market-based financial system, the euro area is very largely bank-centred. Accordingly, in a euro area context, guaranteeing firms and households steady access to credit largely means preserving the functioning of the banking system. In our economy, banks play such a dominant role that non-standard measures need to be implemented – first and foremost – through the intervention and with the active participation of banks. This is why I have sometimes referred to our non-standard measures as those of enhanced credit support. They aim at supporting banks in providing credit to firms and households on an ongoing basis.This goes a long way towards explaining events in the past. As regards the possible further additional non-standard measures, I have been very clear. On behalf of the Governing Council, during my last press conference in Frankfurt: We will decide in our next monetary policy decision Governing Council meeting on 7 May. And it is on 7 May that I will make public the decision of the Governing Council. At this stage, as a porte-parole of the Governing Council, I think it is important not to create or encourage expectations. Be sure that what we will decide will fully take into account the financing structure of the euro area economy and will be fully in line with our medium term strategy.When taking all our decisions, we are inspired by our remit to provide a solid nominal anchor for the economic system. As you know, the ECB’s quantitative definition of price stability is a key element of its monetary policy strategy. We define price stability as a year-on-year increase in consumer prices of below 2% over the medium term. In 2003 the ECB’s Governing Council clarified that, within its definition, it aims to keep the inflation rate close to 2% over the medium term. This clarification was aimed at confirming the robust anchor for long-term inflation expectations that the ECB had provided since the setting up of the euro. In the first ten years since the introduction of the euro, the ECB’s quantitative definition of price stability has proved to be an invaluable asset, guarding against undesirably high inflation and against deflation. Long-term inflation expectations in the euro area, whether based on surveys or extracted from financial indicators, have been and continue to be firmly anchored at levels consistent with our definition of price stability. More than ever, in the present very demanding circumstances, confidence is key. The global economy was hit in mid-September 2008 by an unprecedented sudden loss of confidence. It was perhaps the first time in economic history that a single adverse event was able, in just a few days, to have a simultaneous adverse effect on all private economic agents in every economy, industrialised and emerging. We are in uncharted waters, and the risk of the sudden emergence of economic and financial phenomena and unprecedented behaviour on the part of economic agents remains. Public authorities, executive branches, and central banks must do all they can to restore, preserve and foster confidence among households and corporations in order to pave the way for sustainable prosperity. This calls for a measured response to changing conditions. We must maintain the appropriate balance between the need to take immediate action that is commensurate with the gravity of today’s situation, and the equally essential obligation to return to a path that is sustainable in the medium to long term. Confidence today relies equally upon the audacity of our immediate decision and upon the soundness and credibility of our exit strategies. Any ambiguity in our medium term policy direction would delay the return of sustainable prosperity, because they would undermine confidence, which is the most precious ingredient in the present circumstances. We will continue serve our 329 million fellow citizens as a solid anchor of stability and confidence.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen honour invit address naigai josei chousa kai today would like share view root current financi crisi polici respons aim address inspir new sens direct g meet fortnight ago sent strong signal reform provid basi resili stabl global economi period come swift implement import agenda key explain ecb respons financi crisi also note en passant polici compar major central bank view differ crisi manag approach major central bank reflect differ econom structur rather conflict view fundament principl ecb guid principl simpl clear medium term ecb polici gear toward preserv price stabil line object creat condit endur financi stabil polici essenti reviv resourc becom much scarc recent month confid futur last ten year financ seen dramat shift focus away facilit trade real invest unfett specul financi gambl assumpt hedg genuin econom risk risk compani face engag product process innov gradual ceas main concern intern financ time creation assumpt financi risk becam core activ financi industri risk pose arbitrag deliber exposur asset price chang reach point seem financi system longer exist primarili hedg exist econom risk increas creat propag new risk past two decad financi innov liberalis made import contribut overal product economi demand financ increas throughout intermediari grow incent develop innov fund techniqu securitis asset exampl transform bilater loan tradabl credit instrument tremend abil facilit diversif effici manag risk power use tool securitis also meant bank nonbank abl sell loan place offbal sheet immedi extend alchemi enabl lender expand volum oper conserv capit fatal mechan weaken lender incent prudent screen constant monitor result declin underwrit standard lend oversight one main reason excess credit growth credit boom exacerb three factor first illdesign compens scheme loan manag reinforc shorten lender horizon eye mani loan manag shortrun gain expans credit outweigh need consid potenti loss institut could incur longer term second complex structur securitis product made difficult holder assess qualiti under invest perpetu boom took time investor discov assess under risk third intern macroeconom imbal reflect chronic shortag save world advanc economi made possibl glut save part world imbal result unbalanc intern macroeconom polici pursu inconsist set goal imbal also contribut augment global liquid fuell credit debt accumul period start crisi oil commod price boom fuell intern save glut aggrav major imbal interplay forc facilit factor describ far went revers middl revers sudden unexpect asset cycl turn mani miss link financi chain final expos investor lost confid year high profit except risk toler market becam extrem discrimin regard financi risk fund cost borrow increas spread debt financi compani seen clog asset dubious valu widen consider uncertainti extent credit writeoff futur earn capac financi institut took heavi toll valuat mani rever name central bank around globe spring action summer sign appear time liquid crisi might rememb ecb first central bank embark except decis earli august collaps major high interconnect financi player midseptemb eventu turn largescal financi market correct financi panic throughout difficult month follow central bank govern around globe took unpreced bold step step aim restor financi market function flow credit ensur bank capit liquid necessari discharg critic function even acut econom downturn go detail allow say crisi brought best term intern cooper lead central bank around globe includ bank japan ecb cooper intim allevi financ strain interbank market governor shirakawa numer use exchang view sidelin regular meet g g level import occas global economi meet central bank governor take place everi two month basel languag game theori one could say major central bank close cooper deliv best possibl outcom global economi similar outcom g meet fortnight ago confirm govern agre futur cours polici base uniti purpos share principl action decis immedi action still requir view progress three front critic restor confid two gear medium term one gear short term first need quantum leap breadth author intern financi supervis regul viabl effect solut necessarili requir broaden focus overcom fragment domest oversight arrang second last confid restor commit nearterm fiscal monetari stimulus back equal strong credibl commit fiscal sustain price stabil import point cannot overst third govern need swift implement farreach set measur design support financi system fellow governor governor shirakawa convinc argu resolut action put commerci bank healthi situat absolut indispens experi japan begin millennium absenc action risk fiscal stimulus packag simpli trickl away leav us burden full load outsiz fiscal liabil prospect sustain econom recoveri far europ advanc issu regard financi supervis regul european union current prepar import decis along line recommend de larosièr report among thing report propos new system macroprudenti supervis general council ecb would play import role certain lack warn mani quarter crisi mechan institut exist ensur admonit follow decis swift action new european system would assign task preemptiv analysi grant necessari author put risk mitig measur practic regard appropri balanc nearterm stimulus mediumterm stabil euro area clear benefit mediumterm stabilityori framework invalu anchor privat sector expect regard fiscal sustain price stabil prove valu time crisi framework emerg even stronger regard overal support financi sector deepli impress action plan drawn euro area govern european commiss within short period time action plan swift implement confound sceptic question abil euro area govern act time fashion event major econom crisi nevertheless action urgent need entir resolv toxic asset problem let turn detail ecb manag financi crisi first sign liquid hoard bank appear august ecb took sever measur protect disord correct credit bank concern volum liquid could secur present also horizon liquid expect remain avail first thing provid bank insur futur liquid shortfal lengthen liquid horizon bank expand share refinanc grant matur longer two week insur scheme encourag bank maintain lend relat client central europ financi architectur time help bolster public confid bank would remain solvent financi panic develop midseptemb mark dramat turn point interbank trade euro area elsewher came virtual halt cashrich bank unwil unabl lend cashdefici institut ecb substitut miss interbank trade start provid credit well level bank absorb fulfil reserv requir normal time sinc octob background drastic deterior global condit fall commod price rapid reced inflationari pressur ecb step crisi resolut measur extraordinari effort protect function financi system stabil economi primari concern preserv avail credit household compani access rate new fixedr full allot tender procedur bank grant access essenti unlimit liquid polici interest rate fulli appreci mean one note normal time auction given amount central bank credit let competit among bidder determin interest rate credit becom avail bank system whole demand liquid individu institut expend abnorm market ceas perform alloc function turn practic around determin lend rate stand readi fill shortag liquid might occur interest rate current surrog market alloc price discoveri function also consider lengthen list elig asset bank pledg collater eas bank balanc sheet constraint facilit liquefact bank asset market could find price intent encourag bank extend new credit continu roll matur loan tradit number counterparti elig take part refinanc oper ordinari longterm largest among major central bank direct compar eurosystem structur featur oper framework instrument first stage crisi ensur relev intermediari could grant easi access liquid recent chang oper framework expand number juli march counterparti increas grant unlimit access central bank credit decreas cost key polici rate reduc basi point sinc exacerb crisi autumn last year speak eurosystem provid refinanc commerci bank present elig collater rate sound creditworthi bank secur overnight credit interest rate signific lower today someth never seen entir postwar histori european monetari affair abl borrow low cost bank grant credit bank nonbank borrow condit favour histor intern standard exampl month month euro interbank offer rate benchmark euro area bank wide use reset floatingr loan household firm reach level lower correspond rate contract denomin dollar british pound underscor current circumst intern comparison polici rate alon provid pertin inform effect credit condit prevail singl market measur support credit result sharp expans eurosystem balanc sheet bank usag central bank credit soar height crisi late last year valu oper grew quick june march size balanc sheet increas close billion sinc end septemb growth overal size oper measur like prevent whole credit market seiz sinc volum declin somewhat bank conserv bid central bank credit strain money market eas certain extent ecb far concentr nonstandard measur commerci bank refinanc main natur euro area financi structur compar unit state primarili marketbas financi system euro area larg bankcentr accord euro area context guarante firm household steadi access credit larg mean preserv function bank system economi bank play domin role nonstandard measur need implement first foremost intervent activ particip bank sometim refer nonstandard measur enhanc credit support aim support bank provid credit firm household ongo basi goe long way toward explain event past regard possibl addit nonstandard measur clear behalf govern council last press confer frankfurt decid next monetari polici decis govern council meet may may make public decis govern council stage porteparol govern council think import creat encourag expect sure decid fulli take account financ structur euro area economi fulli line medium term strategi take decis inspir remit provid solid nomin anchor econom system know ecb quantit definit price stabil key element monetari polici strategi defin price stabil yearonyear increas consum price medium term ecb govern council clarifi within definit aim keep inflat rate close medium term clarif aim confirm robust anchor longterm inflat expect ecb provid sinc set euro first ten year sinc introduct euro ecb quantit definit price stabil prove invalu asset guard undesir high inflat deflat longterm inflat expect euro area whether base survey extract financi indic continu firm anchor level consist definit price stabil ever present demand circumst confid key global economi hit midseptemb unpreced sudden loss confid perhap first time econom histori singl advers event abl day simultan advers effect privat econom agent everi economi industrialis emerg unchart water risk sudden emerg econom financi phenomena unpreced behaviour part econom agent remain public author execut branch central bank must restor preserv foster confid among household corpor order pave way sustain prosper call measur respons chang condit must maintain appropri balanc need take immedi action commensur graviti today situat equal essenti oblig return path sustain medium long term confid today reli equal upon audac immedi decis upon sound credibl exit strategi ambigu medium term polici direct would delay return sustain prosper would undermin confid precious ingredi present circumst continu serv million fellow citizen solid anchor stabil confid reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en