Benoît Cœuré: Ensuring the smooth functioning of money markets,16-01-2013,European Central Bank,ECB,3830,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen, [1]It is a pleasure to speak to you today at this annual Global Securities Financing Summit organised by Clearstream / Deutsche Börse Group.In my remarks today, I will talk about the smooth functioning of money markets and the role of market infrastructures in this respect. The speech is composed of two parts. I will start with some comments on developments in the euro area (interbank) money markets. As you are well aware, the financial crisis and the subsequent sovereign debt crisis have led to a gradual shift from the unsecured to the secured segment of the money markets. Moreover, the crises have exposed the weaknesses of certain financial institutions, causing the European interbank money market to fragment. Fragmentation has occurred between cash-rich and cash-strapped banks and also between different jurisdictions, leading to a “renationalisation” of money markets. Since money markets can be a source and a propagation channel of financial instability, it is important to ensure their proper functioning and mitigate the potential risks they pose.In the second part of my speech I will consider the role of market infrastructures in ensuring well-functioning money markets. For this part, I will refer back to work conducted by the Basel Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) in 2010 when it examined the extent to which the market infrastructure for repos added to the uncertainty or instability evident in some repo markets. I will take up two issues identified in the related report published by the CPSS [2] and which can be considered relevant for the smooth functioning of euro money markets, i.e. the role of market infrastructures in providing adequate protection against counterparty risk as well as the efficient use of collateral. In so doing, I will also discuss some tensions which have emerged recently relating to a particular development at market infrastructure level, where it is important to quickly address the underlying issues in order to move forward.Well-functioning money markets are an essential component of the financial system. When money markets do not function, financial stability and the transmission of monetary policy are at risk, with potentially severe adverse consequences for the real economy. Deep and liquid money markets insure banks against liquidity risk, a risk that arises naturally in banking, where maturity mismatch is the nature of the business. Unsecured money markets exert a useful disciplinary effect on banks. Money markets also are the starting point for the redistribution of the liquidity provided by central banks and hence the starting point for the transmission of monetary policy. For example, the EONIA rate – the rate of unsecured overnight lending between some of the largest euro area banks – is an important first link in the chain of monetary policy transmission.Ever since the financial turmoil started in August 2007 – more than five years ago – and then became a severe crisis with the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers one year later in September 2008, money markets have not been operating smoothly. The outbreak of the financial crisis has been well documented, but it is worthwhile recalling the extent of the shocks, which are still being felt today. [3] Within a few days after the demise of Lehman Brothers on 15 September 2008, the EURIBOR-OIS spread, which had been zero a little over 12 months before, rose to a staggering 186 basis points (in the United States the spread rose to 365 basis points). In addition, cash-rich banks were apparently no longer lending to cash-poor banks. The flow of liquidity in the financial system came to a sudden stop. Prior to the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, banks hardly ever deposited funds at the ECB (where they earn the deposit facility rate, which at the time was 1% less than the policy rate). After the Lehman bankruptcy, banks suddenly deposited an aggregate amount of around €200 billion. Deposits increased since the ECB responded to the tensions in the market by accommodating the increase in banks’ demand for liquidity. [4] The extent of banks’ use of the ECB’s deposit facility is a useful indicator of the impairment of the flow of liquidity throughout the banking system, especially when the group of depositing banks is different from the group of borrowing banks. [5]A further troubling indication of the malfunctioning of money markets right after the Lehman bankruptcy came from cross-border transactions. Before the bankruptcy, cross-border transactions accounted for 60% of all unsecured overnight interbank lending. Right after the bankruptcy, this proportion dropped to 50%. A fall in the cross-border flow of liquidity indicates a fragmentation of the euro area money market along national borders and threatens the implementation of a common monetary policy throughout the euro area.The ECB reacted and succeeded in calming markets, including money markets, first by conducting two monetary policy operations with a three-year maturity, and then, most recently, by committing to remove redenomination risk in countries having signed to an ESM assistance programme (the so-called Outright Monetary Transactions, OMTs for short). For example, the share of the cross-border overnight transactions increased gradually from 30% to 50% following the OMT announcement.The rise and fall of the EURIBOR-OIS spread, of the use of the ECB’s deposit facility and the proportion of cross-border transactions all indicate that banks are more risk-averse than they were before the financial crisis. Money markets, especially unsecured ones, suffer from counterparty risk, that is, the fear of not being repaid.Accordingly, driven by the desire to protect and ensure repayment, transactions in money markets have become both more short-term and secured. There is no official data on the overall size of the repo market in the euro area, although surveys are regularly conducted by ICMA and the ECB. According to the latest ICMA survey, the total value of repo contracts outstanding on the books of the 62 participating institutions was €5.6 trillion in June 2012, down from €6.2 trillion in December 2011. [6] The ECB’s Money Market Study of December 2012 with 172 banks participating shows a similar development. [7] The Money Market Study also compares the development of the secured with the unsecured market. And indeed, while the unsecured money market has steadily contracted since 2007, the secured money market has held its ground over the same period.Another, more recent and troubling development in the functioning of the money markets is the on-going investigations into manipulations of key money market reference rates. The ECB is closely following this development and is supporting the attempts to reform reference rates, given the role they play in the transmission of monetary policy. In our response to the European Commission’s public consultation, while stressing that reference rates should remain private market initiatives, we have called for short-term governance reforms to restore and uphold the credibility of these reference rates, associated with longer-term measures involving changes in the calculation methodology. In the short term, governance reforms and increased supervisory and regulatory scrutiny can help to restore the market’s confidence in the integrity of the benchmarks and to ensure their continuous viability. An appropriate balance must be found between a sound production process with adequate controls and safeguards on the one hand, and cost-efficiency for contributing banks on the other hand. Also it is important that regulation is uniformly applied and enforced within the EU to avoid risks of further fragmentation in the money markets, and that international coordination is sought. In the longer term, a broader overhaul can be conceived, involving changes in the calculation methodology and possibly other changes to reflect the structural changes that have taken place in terms of the functioning of the money market since the onset of the crisis, such as the shift towards secured transactions. However, this process should be primarily driven by the market, based on the needs of end-users, while being supported by the public sector. In light of the fundamental importance of money market reference rates, we are closely following the developments taking place as regards the shrinking number of panel members for establishing EURIBOR and EONIA rates. Given the authorities’ commitment to addressing the shortcomings revealed in the rate-setting process, it is in the interest of markets that banks remain in the panel while the regulatory framework is being amended and behave as responsible market participants, thus preventing potential disruption in the functioning of an important financial market segment.Related to the shift of money market transactions to the secured segment is the use of central counterparties (CCPs [8]). In 2012, CCP repo transactions accounted for 55% of all repo transactions (up from 50% in 2010). In addition to the use of CCPs, triparty repo [9] has become more important. Triparty repo accounted for 11% of all repo transactions in 2012 (up from 9% in 2010).I will come back to CCPs and triparty repo later on, but would first like to say some words on collateral and haircuts. Collateral of course is intended to hedge default risk, while haircuts are usually seen as being intended to hedge the risk on that collateral. In times of market stress however, large and sudden margin increases can create self-reinforcing, pro-cyclical spirals of increasing weakness, exacerbate market swings and oblige market dealers to provide collateral to support secured transactions just when it is most costly to do so. Two examples come to mind.First, when the sovereign debt crisis intensified, haircuts on government bonds under stress also went up because the rise in yields reduced their collateral value. For example, when the spread on Italian ten-year government bonds relative to core issuers rose to over 450 basis points in November 2011, the haircut for Italian government bonds was increased by 500 basis points, leading to a posting of intraday margins about 12 times greater than in any other preceding month in 2011. On the day of the increased haircut alone, the spread between Italian and German government bonds rose by 60 basis points. In addition, margin increases generally reduce the amount that a repo seller can borrow, which might increase the seller’s probability of default. This can trigger a negative feedback loop: increases in the probability of default might cause repo buyers to increase the haircuts imposed on the seller, which reduces the amount the seller can borrow (when it needs to borrow subsequently), and so on. [10]The ECB/Eurosystem has been successful in easing market tensions using standard and non-standard tools. However, the underlying structural problems which relate to uncertainty about risk, whether in the form of counterparty, credit, liquidity or redenomination risk, need to be solved. When implemented, the Single Supervisory Mechanism will play a key role in comforting confidence in euro area banks and re-establishing cross-border liquidity flows within the region. Market re-integration has now started. It will succeed only if it is supported by continued efforts by governments to bridge fiscal and competitiveness imbalances. We can consider how the further development of market infrastructures can be an important part of this process.In the second part of my remarks today, I would like to consider the role of market infrastructures. Market infrastructures have proven very resilient to the crisis. [11] Resilient market infrastructures also play an important role in helping to address some of the issues that have been identified in the money markets. In this regard we can usefully build on the CPSS’ analysis of areas for further development and for enhancing market infrastructures in repo markets. The CPSS has identified seven issues directly or indirectly related to repo market infrastructure that may affect the resilience of repo markets. I would like to pick up on two of these seven issues now in the context of euro area money markets. The first issue concerns “effective protection against counterparty credit risk”, which I believe can be addressed to some extent by the use of CCPs, while the second issue relates to “the inefficient use of (high-quality) collateral due to constraints within repo clearing and settlement arrangements”, which is being addressed via collateral optimisation initiatives. CCPs play a major role in reducing counterparty risk, thereby mitigating the potential risks associated with the drying-up of funding sources. First, as independent clearing agents, CCPs are well positioned to offer effective protection against counterparty risk through the application of consistent margin requirements to a wide range of counterparties and through multilateral netting and risk sharing. Second, CCPs also provide enhanced transparency for the markets they serve, which in turn facilitates appropriate risk management and may also help to reduce excessive leverage. Third, as a result of multilateral netting, CCPs may also free up collateral. [12] Overall, provided that it is well-managed and in line with applicable regulatory and oversight requirements, a CCP can be expected to guarantee trade execution under a wide range of market conditions, including extreme or exceptional scenarios. This supports trading also at times of distress when uncertainty and risk aversion may disrupt activity and exacerbate volatility in markets. Given the benefits of central clearing for market resilience and financial stability more broadly, the ECB welcomes the overall increase in the share of transactions that are cleared through CCPs. It also supports the execution of repo transactions via CCPs. In Europe, market incentives seem sufficiently strong to favour use of CCPs, and we would not see a need at the current juncture to advocate regulatory action to impose central clearing of repos, as has been the case for OTC derivative transactions. At the same time, an expanded use of CCPs should be accompanied by effective supervision and oversight, which always needs to be kept up to date and in line with new market developments. The global Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (PFMIs), developed jointly by CPSS and the International Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) and published last April, are a key pillar in this regard. Major jurisdictions around the world are now updating their supervisory and oversight requirements for CCPs in response to the new PFMIs, thereby leading to an even more robust set-up for CCPs. Another major strand of work currently underway at both international and EU level concerns the development of recovery and resolution regimes for CCPs. In the EU, the European Commission has recently consulted the public on a possible framework for the recovery and resolution of financial institutions other than banks, covering CCPs and other market infrastructures. We trust that the European framework will be closely aligned with the respective global work of the CPSS and IOSCO. Besides CCPs, another key infrastructure to be considered in relation to the repo market is the trade repository. [13] Trade repositories provide a comprehensive overview of the transactions in the markets they serve, which contributes to better risk management, public supervision and oversight as well as market discipline. The ECB actively supports the current work to develop such a central database for the EU repo market. [14] It could be established in a joint effort by public authorities and the financial industry.Let me now turn to the second point on collateral optimisation. As recognised in the CPSS report, the “efficient and flexible use of collateral facilitates market participants’ collateral management and can contribute to the development of liquidity and smoothly functioning repo markets”. This was considered to hold true for repo markets in normal times as well as allowing an enhancement of the resilience of repo markets in times of stress. The need for efficient and flexible use of collateral facilities has even become greater in the past couple of years, taking into account the generally increasing demands for collateral assets coming from various quarters. Efforts are therefore being made to seek out creative and innovative ways to make better use of existing collateral in terms of making these assets available, when and where they are needed.Both the Eurosystem and the industry have taken a number of initiatives in this respect. At today’s conference, you will probably hear more about the many innovative solutions that are coming from the industry in this respect, so I will limit myself to some key initiatives in which the ECB/Eurosystem is directly involved, although naturally cooperating closely with the industry.The first initiative in this respect of course is TARGET2 Securities – T2S. The main objective of establishing this single European infrastructure for securities settlement is to reduce risk and increase efficiencies in the post-trade environment, especially as far as cross-border settlement is concerned. This greatly enhanced process for transferring collateral across national borders in Europe will in itself be a huge benefit to market participants – both to cover collateralised money market transactions as well as collateralised credit operations with central banks. Moreover, T2S incorporates several features that aim to help banks optimise their collateral management. Once T2S goes live for example, banks will no longer need to hold multiple buffers of collateral when settling in several European countries and can instead use the state-of-the-art T2S auto-collateralisation and self-collateralisation features, also on a cross-border basis. The second initiative that I want to mention is the implementation of cross-border triparty collateral management services within the Eurosystem collateral framework. Triparty services, as you know, involve a triparty agent acting as a facilitator between the two parties to the repo. Triparty services are already used within the current operational framework of the Eurosystem, although only on a domestic basis and limited to a small number of euro area countries (Germany, Luxembourg, France and Italy). In 2014 however, the possibility to collateralise Eurosystem credit operations by using triparty services on a cross-border basis will be introduced, thereby allowing for greater efficiencies in collateral mobilisation and re-use of collateral received in triparty repo with the respective central banks of the Eurosystem. Another initiative with which the ECB is associated relates to triparty settlement interoperability. [15] When we refer to this, we should keep in mind that an important feature of the European repo market set-up is the (increasing) integration between the repo clearing, settlement and collateral management layers. While there is an increasing integration across these layers however, there remains in some cases a certain fragmentation that limits traders’ opportunities based on the location of the collateral. Working in close cooperation with the European Repo Council (ERC), the international central securities depositories (ICSDs) have started to develop a triparty settlement interoperability model to support settlement of general collateral trading cleared by CCPs. With the interoperability between the two ICSDs’ collateral management systems, market participants would avoid the fragmentation of their liquidity pools.The ECB is fully behind this market-led triparty interoperability initiative because of its collateral pooling benefits and efficiencies. Moreover, it reduces the costs for triparty repos related to collateral management, settlement and legal charges, and allows trading to be executed regardless of the location of the collateral. Non-discriminatory, risk-based access to and by market infrastructures is an important element of the new international regulatory framework. With market participants increasingly moving to central clearing, the business case for triparty interoperability is growing. Furthermore, the new CPSS-IOSCO principles for financial market infrastructures were specifically strengthened to facilitate access and interaction between such infrastructures. Some of the key parties involved in this triparty settlement interoperability initiative have started to show signs of retreating in past months. While the ECB understands the complexity of establishing a triparty interoperability model and the substantial efforts and in particular the investment costs required to make it work, it would like to strongly urge all parties to continue to work together. Interoperability will bring important benefits – by allowing a more efficient use of collateral by bringing together separate pools of liquidity. The ECB remains ready to continue to support the triparty settlement interoperability initiative and to help bring the project forward. Let me conclude. The resilience and proper functioning of market infrastructures is of paramount importance to ensure well-functioning money markets. Public authorities and central banks have both an interest and an obligation to ensure that market infrastructures have a high level of security and operational performance. The market infrastructures in the euro area are performing well in this respect and, as we have heard, there are a number of initiatives under way to further enhance this (in particular as regards the collateralisation processes).I would, however, urge industry representatives to further pursue the triparty interoperability project, and seek to find ways to address the issues which have recently appeared. In particular, where these issues are not going to be addressed by T2S, I would encourage the industry to find a solution now. It is of great importance that collateral can flow freely, regardless of its location. I am confident that further improvements will be made.Thank you.[1]I wish to thank Fiona van Echelpoel, Benjamin Hanssens, Florian Heider, and Marie Hoerova, for their contributions to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.[2]CPSS report: “Strengthening repo clearing and settlement arrangements”, September 2010.[3]See, for example, F. Heider, M. Hoerova and C. Holthausen, “Liquidity hoarding and interbank market spreads: The role of counterparty risk”, ECB Working Paper No 1126, 2009. See also B. Cœuré, “The importance of money markets”, speech delivered at the Morgan Stanley 16th Annual Global Investment seminar, Tourrettes, Provence, 16 June 2012.[4]Injecting liquidity in the financial system increases the assets of the Eurosystem, which leads to an equivalent increase in liabilities, in this case in the form of more deposits from banks. [5]A similar cessation of interbank lending after the Lehman bankruptcy has been documented in the United States. See G. Afonso, A. Kovner, and A. Schoar, “Stressed, Not Frozen: The Federal Funds Market in the Financial Crisis”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 66, No 4, 2011.[6]See International Capital Market Association, “European Repo Market Survey”, No 23, June 2012, available at http://www.icmagroup.org/assets/documents/Market-Info/Repo-Market-Surveys/ICMA-ERC-European-Repo-Survey-June-2012.pdf.[7]See ECB Money Market Survey: http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/euromoneymarketstudy201212en.pdf?4261e943bbcfec98572319740bda877b [8]A CCP is an entity that interposes itself between the buyer and the seller of a repo, thereby reducing counterparty risk for both seller and buyer as long as the CCP itself is well diversified and well governed.[9]Under triparty repo, a central securities depository (CSD), an international CSD or a custodian bank, for example, acts as a facilitator between the buyer and the seller of a repo. The triparty agent handles the related collateral management, including valuation and substitution as well as re-use of the collateral with a central bank where possible.[10]See T.V. Dang, G. Gorton, and B. Holmström, “Financial Crises and the Optimality of Debt for Liquidity Provision,” working paper, November 2009.[11]Speech by Benoît Cœuré, at the joint ECB-MNB conference on “Cost and efficiency of retail payments: Evidence, policy actions and role of central banks”, Budapest, 15 November 2012. https://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2012/html/sp121115_2.en.html [12]See, for instance, D. Duffie and H. Zhu, “Does a Central Clearing Counterparty Reduce Counterparty Risk?”, Review of Asset Pricing Studies, Vol. 1, Issue 1, December 2011.[13]Trade repositories are central databases that compile and aggregate data across various execution and clearing venues.[14]See Vítor Constâncio, Introductory remarks to the ECB workshop – Repo market and securities lending: towards an EU database, 3 December 2012, see https://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2012/html/sp121203.en.html [15]Triparty interoperability is especially relevant for standard interbank operations/repos, which are cleared at CCPs and where CCPs use standardised baskets of eligible collateral (also referred to as general collateral (GC) baskets).Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen pleasur speak today annual global secur financ summit organis clearstream deutsch börse group remark today talk smooth function money market role market infrastructur respect speech compos two part start comment develop euro area interbank money market well awar financi crisi subsequ sovereign debt crisi led gradual shift unsecur secur segment money market moreov crise expos weak certain financi institut caus european interbank money market fragment fragment occur cashrich cashstrap bank also differ jurisdict lead renationalis money market sinc money market sourc propag channel financi instabl import ensur proper function mitig potenti risk pose second part speech consid role market infrastructur ensur wellfunct money market part refer back work conduct basel committe payment settlement system cpss examin extent market infrastructur repo ad uncertainti instabl evid repo market take two issu identifi relat report publish cpss consid relev smooth function euro money market e role market infrastructur provid adequ protect counterparti risk well effici use collater also discuss tension emerg recent relat particular develop market infrastructur level import quick address under issu order move forward wellfunct money market essenti compon financi system money market function financi stabil transmiss monetari polici risk potenti sever advers consequ real economi deep liquid money market insur bank liquid risk risk aris natur bank matur mismatch natur busi unsecur money market exert use disciplinari effect bank money market also start point redistribut liquid provid central bank henc start point transmiss monetari polici exampl eonia rate rate unsecur overnight lend largest euro area bank import first link chain monetari polici transmiss ever sinc financi turmoil start august five year ago becam sever crisi bankruptci lehman brother one year later septemb money market oper smooth outbreak financi crisi well document worthwhil recal extent shock still felt today within day demis lehman brother septemb euriboroi spread zero littl month rose stagger basi point unit state spread rose basi point addit cashrich bank appar longer lend cashpoor bank flow liquid financi system came sudden stop prior bankruptci lehman brother bank hard ever deposit fund ecb earn deposit facil rate time less polici rate lehman bankruptci bank sudden deposit aggreg amount around billion deposit increas sinc ecb respond tension market accommod increas bank demand liquid extent bank use ecb deposit facil use indic impair flow liquid throughout bank system especi group deposit bank differ group borrow bank troubl indic malfunct money market right lehman bankruptci came crossbord transact bankruptci crossbord transact account unsecur overnight interbank lend right bankruptci proport drop fall crossbord flow liquid indic fragment euro area money market along nation border threaten implement common monetari polici throughout euro area ecb react succeed calm market includ money market first conduct two monetari polici oper threeyear matur recent commit remov redenomin risk countri sign esm assist programm socal outright monetari transact omt short exampl share crossbord overnight transact increas gradual follow omt announc rise fall euriboroi spread use ecb deposit facil proport crossbord transact indic bank riskavers financi crisi money market especi unsecur one suffer counterparti risk fear repaid accord driven desir protect ensur repay transact money market becom shortterm secur offici data overal size repo market euro area although survey regular conduct icma ecb accord latest icma survey total valu repo contract outstand book particip institut trillion june trillion decemb ecb money market studi decemb bank particip show similar develop money market studi also compar develop secur unsecur market inde unsecur money market steadili contract sinc secur money market held ground period anoth recent troubl develop function money market ongo investig manipul key money market refer rate ecb close follow develop support attempt reform refer rate given role play transmiss monetari polici respons european commiss public consult stress refer rate remain privat market initi call shortterm govern reform restor uphold credibl refer rate associ longerterm measur involv chang calcul methodolog short term govern reform increas supervisori regulatori scrutini help restor market confid integr benchmark ensur continu viabil appropri balanc must found sound product process adequ control safeguard one hand costeffici contribut bank hand also import regul uniform appli enforc within eu avoid risk fragment money market intern coordin sought longer term broader overhaul conceiv involv chang calcul methodolog possibl chang reflect structur chang taken place term function money market sinc onset crisi shift toward secur transact howev process primarili driven market base need endus support public sector light fundament import money market refer rate close follow develop take place regard shrink number panel member establish euribor eonia rate given author commit address shortcom reveal rateset process interest market bank remain panel regulatori framework amend behav respons market particip thus prevent potenti disrupt function import financi market segment relat shift money market transact secur segment use central counterparti ccps ccp repo transact account repo transact addit use ccps triparti repo becom import triparti repo account repo transact come back ccps triparti repo later would first like say word collater haircut collater cours intend hedg default risk haircut usual seen intend hedg risk collater time market stress howev larg sudden margin increas creat selfreinforc procycl spiral increas weak exacerb market swing oblig market dealer provid collater support secur transact cost two exampl come mind first sovereign debt crisi intensifi haircut govern bond stress also went rise yield reduc collater valu exampl spread italian tenyear govern bond relat core issuer rose basi point novemb haircut italian govern bond increas basi point lead post intraday margin time greater preced month day increas haircut alon spread italian german govern bond rose basi point addit margin increas general reduc amount repo seller borrow might increas seller probabl default trigger negat feedback loop increas probabl default might caus repo buyer increas haircut impos seller reduc amount seller borrow need borrow subsequ ecbeurosystem success eas market tension use standard nonstandard tool howev under structur problem relat uncertainti risk whether form counterparti credit liquid redenomin risk need solv implement singl supervisori mechan play key role comfort confid euro area bank reestablish crossbord liquid flow within region market reintegr start succeed support continu effort govern bridg fiscal competit imbal consid develop market infrastructur import part process second part remark today would like consid role market infrastructur market infrastructur proven resili crisi resili market infrastructur also play import role help address issu identifi money market regard use build cpss analysi area develop enhanc market infrastructur repo market cpss identifi seven issu direct indirect relat repo market infrastructur may affect resili repo market would like pick two seven issu context euro area money market first issu concern effect protect counterparti credit risk believ address extent use ccps second issu relat ineffici use highqual collater due constraint within repo clear settlement arrang address via collater optimis initi ccps play major role reduc counterparti risk therebi mitig potenti risk associ dryingup fund sourc first independ clear agent ccps well posit offer effect protect counterparti risk applic consist margin requir wide rang counterparti multilater net risk share second ccps also provid enhanc transpar market serv turn facilit appropri risk manag may also help reduc excess leverag third result multilater net ccps may also free collater overal provid wellmanag line applic regulatori oversight requir ccp expect guarante trade execut wide rang market condit includ extrem except scenario support trade also time distress uncertainti risk avers may disrupt activ exacerb volatil market given benefit central clear market resili financi stabil broad ecb welcom overal increas share transact clear ccps also support execut repo transact via ccps europ market incent seem suffici strong favour use ccps would see need current junctur advoc regulatori action impos central clear repo case otc deriv transact time expand use ccps accompani effect supervis oversight alway need kept date line new market develop global principl financi market infrastructur pfmis develop joint cpss intern organis secur commiss iosco publish last april key pillar regard major jurisdict around world updat supervisori oversight requir ccps respons new pfmis therebi lead even robust setup ccps anoth major strand work current underway intern eu level concern develop recoveri resolut regim ccps eu european commiss recent consult public possibl framework recoveri resolut financi institut bank cover ccps market infrastructur trust european framework close align respect global work cpss iosco besid ccps anoth key infrastructur consid relat repo market trade repositori trade repositori provid comprehens overview transact market serv contribut better risk manag public supervis oversight well market disciplin ecb activ support current work develop central databas eu repo market could establish joint effort public author financi industri let turn second point collater optimis recognis cpss report effici flexibl use collater facilit market particip collater manag contribut develop liquid smooth function repo market consid hold true repo market normal time well allow enhanc resili repo market time stress need effici flexibl use collater facil even becom greater past coupl year take account general increas demand collater asset come various quarter effort therefor made seek creativ innov way make better use exist collater term make asset avail need eurosystem industri taken number initi respect today confer probabl hear mani innov solut come industri respect limit key initi ecbeurosystem direct involv although natur cooper close industri first initi respect cours target secur main object establish singl european infrastructur secur settlement reduc risk increas effici posttrad environ especi far crossbord settlement concern great enhanc process transfer collater across nation border europ huge benefit market particip cover collateralis money market transact well collateralis credit oper central bank moreov incorpor sever featur aim help bank optimis collater manag goe live exampl bank longer need hold multipl buffer collater settl sever european countri instead use stateoftheart autocollateralis selfcollateralis featur also crossbord basi second initi want mention implement crossbord triparti collater manag servic within eurosystem collater framework triparti servic know involv triparti agent act facilit two parti repo triparti servic alreadi use within current oper framework eurosystem although domest basi limit small number euro area countri germani luxembourg franc itali howev possibl collateralis eurosystem credit oper use triparti servic crossbord basi introduc therebi allow greater effici collater mobilis reus collater receiv triparti repo respect central bank eurosystem anoth initi ecb associ relat triparti settlement interoper refer keep mind import featur european repo market setup increas integr repo clear settlement collater manag layer increas integr across layer howev remain case certain fragment limit trader opportun base locat collater work close cooper european repo council erc intern central secur depositori icsd start develop triparti settlement interoper model support settlement general collater trade clear ccps interoper two icsd collater manag system market particip would avoid fragment liquid pool ecb fulli behind marketl triparti interoper initi collater pool benefit effici moreov reduc cost triparti repo relat collater manag settlement legal charg allow trade execut regardless locat collater nondiscriminatori riskbas access market infrastructur import element new intern regulatori framework market particip increas move central clear busi case triparti interoper grow furthermor new cpssiosco principl financi market infrastructur specif strengthen facilit access interact infrastructur key parti involv triparti settlement interoper initi start show sign retreat past month ecb understand complex establish triparti interoper model substanti effort particular invest cost requir make work would like strong urg parti continu work togeth interoper bring import benefit allow effici use collater bring togeth separ pool liquid ecb remain readi continu support triparti settlement interoper initi help bring project forward let conclud resili proper function market infrastructur paramount import ensur wellfunct money market public author central bank interest oblig ensur market infrastructur high level secur oper perform market infrastructur euro area perform well respect heard number initi way enhanc particular regard collateralis process would howev urg industri repres pursu triparti interoper project seek find way address issu recent appear particular issu go address would encourag industri find solut great import collater flow freeli regardless locat confid improv made thank wish thank fiona van echelpoel benjamin hanssen florian heider mari hoerova contribut speech remain sole respons opinion contain herein cpss report strengthen repo clear settlement arrang septemb see exampl f heider m hoerova c holthausen liquid hoard interbank market spread role counterparti risk ecb work paper see also b cœuré import money market speech deliv morgan stanley th annual global invest seminar tourrett provenc june inject liquid financi system increas asset eurosystem lead equival increas liabil case form deposit bank similar cessat interbank lend lehman bankruptci document unit state see g afonso kovner schoar stress frozen feder fund market financi crisi journal financ vol see intern capit market associ european repo market survey june avail http www icmagroup orgassetsdocumentsmarketinforepomarketsurveysicmaerceuropeanreposurveyjun pdf see ecb money market survey http www ecb intpubpdfothereuromoneymarketstudi en pdf e bbcfec bda b ccp entiti interpos buyer seller repo therebi reduc counterparti risk seller buyer long ccp well diversifi well govern triparti repo central secur depositori csd intern csd custodian bank exampl act facilit buyer seller repo triparti agent handl relat collater manag includ valuat substitut well reus collater central bank possibl see v dang g gorton b holmström financi crise optim debt liquid provis work paper novemb speech benoît cœuré joint ecbmnb confer cost effici retail payment evid polici action role central bank budapest novemb https www ecb intpresskeyd htmlsp _ en html see instanc d duffi h zhu central clear counterparti reduc counterparti risk review asset price studi vol issu decemb trade repositori central databas compil aggreg data across various execut clear venu see vítor constâncio introductori remark ecb workshop repo market secur lend toward eu databas decemb see https www ecb intpresskeyd htmlsp en html triparti interoper especi relev standard interbank operationsrepo clear ccps ccps use standardis basket elig collater also refer general collater gc basket reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en