Jürgen Stark: Short address at the opening ceremony for the  “Language of Money” exhibition,24-09-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,902,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen, distinguished ambassadors and members of parliament, I am delighted to be here with you in these wonderful premises of the Museum für Kommunikation in Berlin, the oldest former postal museum in the world, and to be able to open the “Language of Money” exhibition.It is with great pleasure that President Trichet acts on behalf of the European Central Bank as a patron of the “Language of Money” exhibition and he deeply regrets not being able to attend today’s opening ceremony in person. The European Central Bank appreciates and supports activities aimed at educating the public in financial and economic matters and the exhibition which we will see tonight contributes to this goal. It explains the different forms that money took in past societies and the role of money nowadays.The language of money added a new word to its vocabulary in December 1995 and this new word was the euro. You might recall the debate that was had at the time – the name “ECU” did not sound particularly good in German while, for the French, it was the name of an ancient coin. It was decided that choosing the word euro ought to favour no language in particular. This created a solid foundation for the new currency. However, not only the ""professional euro-sceptics"", but many others too would not have predicted that the euro would be such a success. The euro came into being on 1 January 1999 and it is now the currency in 16 Member States of the European Union. With the creation of the euro, it became clear that a currency could represent a decisive step on the long path towards an ever closer union among the peoples of Europe. Since the euro’s introduction, Europeans have benefited from price stability. This is a great success story. The maintenance of price stability, which constitutes the primary goal of the ECB, benefits all citizens of the euro area directly. It protects income and savings, and helps reduce borrowing costs, thus promoting investment and economic growth, which are prerequisites for job creation and prosperity. In recent months, we have seen another of the euro’s benefits during the financial crisis. The euro protected the euro area from internal exchange rate tensions as well as from political ones, as it had done on previous occasions. As the euro banknotes and coins were introduced on 1 January 2002, they became one of the most tangible symbols of Europe. The euro has quickly become an integral part of the everyday lives of citizens within the euro area and it is now used by almost 330 million Europeans on a daily basis. Some 12.5 billion euro banknotes are currently in circulation in Europe and beyond, with a total face value of more than €750 billion. Today, the euro is an internationally accepted currency. People have confidence in the euro – confidence that others accept the currency, that this money is “valid” and that its stability will be sustained over the long term. This confidence is crucial for a currency to thrive.These days, with the euro as our currency, we hardly give a thought to how much it has changed our everyday lives; we can travel without paying a commission to exchange money within the euro area or transfer money within this area and pay the same fee as for a national transfer. In all euro area countries, we can simply hand over some cash or give the cashier a payment card or have the amount due transferred from our bank account to another account with one click of a mouse. However, we should not forget that it has not always been this easy. In this respect, the exhibition is a worthwhile attempt to make people more familiar with the language of money, as money is an integral part of our society. The importance of money in the modern economy is such that it is crucial to be proactive in educating all citizens about how to deal with their own financial affairs in a responsible and cautious manner. This exhibition explains the various forms that money can take.I should also like to take this opportunity to highlight the fruitful cooperation between the European Central Bank and the Museum für Kommunikation which has given the ECB the opportunity to display its “Euro Exhibition” in the museum’s premises from 20 November 2009 until 17 January 2010. I do not want to reveal too many details at this stage, but, as you may have a chance to discover for yourselves later this year, the “Euro Exhibition” features a common theme that will naturally complement the exhibition on the “Language of Money”. It will tell you all about the euro banknotes and how to detect counterfeits in an interactive and entertaining manner. You will be able to learn how the euro aids communication and connection between the people in Europe and the rest of the world. I should therefore like to warmly invite you to this exhibition, which opens on 20 November here at the Museum für Kommunikation in Berlin, before it continues its journey around Europe, having already been shown in Italy, Slovakia and Spain. I should like to take this opportunity to wish you a very enjoyable and informative experience during your visit to the “Language of Money” exhibition and to once again congratulate the Museum für Kommunikation in Berlin on this valuable initiative.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen distinguish ambassador member parliament delight wonder premis museum für kommunik berlin oldest former postal museum world abl open languag money exhibit great pleasur presid trichet act behalf european central bank patron languag money exhibit deepli regret abl attend today open ceremoni person european central bank appreci support activ aim educ public financi econom matter exhibit see tonight contribut goal explain differ form money took past societi role money nowaday languag money ad new word vocabulari decemb new word euro might recal debat time name ecu sound particular good german french name ancient coin decid choos word euro ought favour languag particular creat solid foundat new currenc howev profession euroscept mani other would predict euro would success euro came januari currenc member state european union creation euro becam clear currenc could repres decis step long path toward ever closer union among peopl europ sinc euro introduct european benefit price stabil great success stori mainten price stabil constitut primari goal ecb benefit citizen euro area direct protect incom save help reduc borrow cost thus promot invest econom growth prerequisit job creation prosper recent month seen anoth euro benefit financi crisi euro protect euro area intern exchang rate tension well polit one done previous occas euro banknot coin introduc januari becam one tangibl symbol europ euro quick becom integr part everyday live citizen within euro area use almost million european daili basi billion euro banknot current circul europ beyond total face valu billion today euro intern accept currenc peopl confid euro confid other accept currenc money valid stabil sustain long term confid crucial currenc thrive day euro currenc hard give thought much chang everyday live travel without pay commiss exchang money within euro area transfer money within area pay fee nation transfer euro area countri simpli hand cash give cashier payment card amount due transfer bank account anoth account one click mous howev forget alway easi respect exhibit worthwhil attempt make peopl familiar languag money money integr part societi import money modern economi crucial proactiv educ citizen deal financi affair respons cautious manner exhibit explain various form money take also like take opportun highlight fruit cooper european central bank museum für kommunik given ecb opportun display euro exhibit museum premis novemb januari want reveal mani detail stage may chanc discov later year euro exhibit featur common theme natur complement exhibit languag money tell euro banknot detect counterfeit interact entertain manner abl learn euro aid communic connect peopl europ rest world therefor like warm invit exhibit open novemb museum für kommunik berlin continu journey around europ alreadi shown itali slovakia spain like take opportun wish enjoy inform experi visit languag money exhibit congratul museum für kommunik berlin valuabl initi reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en