Peter Praet: Reforms and growth in the euro area,18-02-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,3821,"<p>It is a great pleasure to be in Portugal today, where we are now seeing signs of a stabilisation in the economy. Economic activity is recovering, the unemployment rate is falling – although from very high levels – and the current account is in surplus. While it will take years for the scars left by the crisis on the economy and society to fade, confidence has been steadily improving during the recent months. Real GDP has been growing at positive rates since the second quarter of 2013 and the most recent information from industrial production, sales, and merchandise trade confirm that this trend is continuing.Other euro area countries that have been hit hard by the crisis are also now beginning down the recovery path, while financial markets have started a more benign pricing of sovereign and private credit risk. All this is thanks to the progress that has been made in macroeconomic, structural and financial repair since the onset of the financial crisis. Especially since mid-2010, the start of the sovereign debt crisis, decisive action has been taken at national and European levels. In the first part of my remarks today, I would like to give an overview of the key measures that have been taken in response to the crisis. My focus will be on the role played by the ECB. Monetary policy has been critical to averting a more severe economic calamity. But the ECB has also made a wider contribution: we have contributed actively to the debate on the deepening of EMU and we have promoted progress toward the euro area’s new financial architecture, the Banking Union.This work of strengthening the euro area is not complete, however. And this is where I would like to focus the second part of my intervention. Specifically, I would like to ask: what further steps are needed to embark on a path of robust growth, both in stressed and non-stressed economies? We know that achieving high sustainable growth will be indispensable to bring the unemployment rate back to acceptable levels and to support debt sustainability. But for this to happen, the euro area as a whole will need to persevere in its efforts to reform its economic fabric. The process of structural reform is demanding – and it therefore requires long-term commitment and strong ownership to be a success.Let me start by briefly reviewing the evolution of the crisis in the euro area.Very broadly speaking, the crisis has had two main phases. The first phase began with the bankruptcy filing of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. Here the euro area shared in a global liquidity crunch that was largely imported from abroad. The second phase began in May 2010 with a sovereign crisis that was localised in the euro area, and that was partially exported to the world economy. This second phase was arguably the more pernicious for monetary union.The re-pricing of sovereign risk in the euro area spread from Greece to other vulnerable economies, and from sovereign to private debt and vice versa. In the process, the liquidity crunch morphed into a systemic crisis for the banking sectors of a number of member countries, and for the integrity of monetary union as a whole. The traditional exposure of banks in vulnerable countries to their own sovereign issuers became a quick carrier of financial contagion as their sovereign bond holdings depreciated and eroded their capital in the eyes of creditors.This adverse sovereign-bank feedback loop interacted with existing vulnerabilities. Countries with persistent competitiveness losses and associated large current account deficits – as was the case of Portugal – were particularly sensitive to a reversal in external financing. This was exacerbated by capital flight to core economies which started to deplete banks’ deposits in the most vulnerable countries. Concerns that systemic sovereign issuers may lose market access fed fears that they may be forced to redeem their liabilities in a currency different from the euro, and thus de facto leave the euro area. ""Redenomination fears"" became a new source of market anxiety. There was a risk that such unwarranted concerns would become self-fulfilling and the spectre of destructive tail scenarios was looming. In this context, the process of financial integration, which had evolved at a rapid pace since the inception of the euro, was partially reversed, giving way to fragmentation. Interbank financial fragmentation per se was not a new phenomenon in the post-Lehman world. However, during the most severe stages of the sovereign crisis the fractures across the euro area were not idiosyncratic but systemic – that is, they ran along national borders. This reversal of the integration process risked undoing one of the key benefits of the common currency. Fragmentation led to an impairment of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. The monetary impulse that the ECB had swiftly introduced in response to the rising risks to price stability was no longer transmitted uniformly throughout the entire euro area. While the ECB had brought its official policy interest rates to historical lows, a number of countries were not in a position to take advantage of monetary accommodation. Banks in those countries were tightening credit conditions, running against the monetary policy intentions of the central bank, with negative repercussions on access to finance, in particular for small and medium-sized enterprises. This translated into a drag on the economic recovery. As a result, the singleness of monetary policy was no longer ensured, posing significant challenges to the ECB’s policy conduct.The ECB responded forcefully to these challenges with a number of standard and non-standard monetary policy measures. The main purpose of the non-standard measures was to reduce financial fragmentation and restore an appropriate functioning of its monetary policy across the euro area. In particular, the measures were geared towards removing two sources of risk premia: bank funding risks and redenomination fears. Higher funding risks for banks had been a symptom of the crisis ever since liquidity strains had first emerged, almost overnight, in the summer of 2007. They had escalated to systemic proportions after the Lehman demise. Since the onset of the crisis, the ECB’s mainstay response to this problem has been twofold: a policy of unlimited provision of liquidity at fixed interest rates against eligible collateral in the weekly main refinancing and longer-term operations, and an extension of maturity of the liquidity operations from 3 months to up to 3 years. This dual approach to crisis management has been reinforced by two further initiatives. First, collateral rules have been adapted in various stages with a view to broadening the pool of assets that banks could mobilise for Eurosystem liquidity provision. This process – which has complemented the fixed-rate-full-allotment decision – has always balanced the need to be supportive to our counterparties with the goal of exercising an appropriate degree of risk control, and to protect our balance sheet. Incidentally, Portuguese banks have greatly benefited from these measures. For instance, they were able to strengthen collateral buffers by mobilising additional credit claims for the purpose of obtaining Eurosystem liquidity – and more effectively than other banking systems in the euro area.Second, the refinancing risk faced by euro area banks has been minimised by giving them reassurance that monetary policy will remain accommodative for an extended period of time. In the course of 2013, this reassurance has taken two forms: conditional forward guidance on the level and direction of our policy rates in the future, and a pledge to maintain the fixed-rate-with-full-allotment policy for as long as needed and at least until mid-2015. These measures proved powerful in addressing the funding risk faced by our counterparties throughout the crisis, as evidenced, for example, by the significant decline in money market term premia. Addressing redenomination fear premia, however, is more alien to central banks, and therefore required a new approach. The Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) initiative was the innovative instrument that we deployed to remove break-up fears from the market pricing of sovereign credit risk, and promote more regular financial conditions. The initiative proved an extremely effective instrument. It has not only reduced the fraction of sovereign spreads that reflected compensation for the redenomination fears, but also contributed more generally to the improvement in funding conditions for corporates, banks and individuals across the euro area. In sum, non-standard measures by the ECB have helped ease liquidity pressures for the euro area in general, and continue to play a pivotal role in alleviating funding constraints for Portuguese banks in particular. And we have seen consistent signs that banks in Portugal – again, more visibly than within other stressed countries – are starting to pass the easing stimulus onto their customers, that is, to firms and households.These monetary policy measures would have been less effective, had they not been flanked by a serious drive toward financial reform. The key element of this ambitious reform agenda has been the Banking Union. It is probably the most ambitious and encompassing reform of the EU architecture since the institution of the single currency. The successful completion of the Banking Union should help to address bank funding fragmentation in a more structural way and give concrete support to credit supply conditions throughout the euro area. Let me explain why.With the creation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) centred on the ECB, banks will be subject to a homogeneous set of rules and procedures. This will make the standards for prudential supervision in the euro area more comparable and evenly applied. As a consequence, supervision should act as a source of integration rather than – as often was the case in the past – an additional cause of fragmentation. But some preliminary steps are needed before the SSM can operate in full. The first and most important precondition is full information about the balance sheets of the euro area banking sector. This is why much of 2014 will be devoted to a comprehensive assessment of the conditions of our banking sector. The Asset Quality Review (AQR) is a central building block in this assessment and a precondition to restore confidence in the banking system of the euro area. Transparency about banks’ balance sheets will help revive private investors' interest in maintaining and increasing exposures to euro area banks. Indeed, expectations of a serious comprehensive assessment have already reinforced the positive trend in the financial markets. Looking forward, the strengthening of bank funding positions – both on the equity and on the debt side – that will result from the exercise will help support credit provision to productive sectors with clear benefits for economic growth in the euro area. The ECB is therefore also playing a role in the repair of the financial sector through its new supervisory function. However, there are clear limits to what the ECB can and should do. These limits are defined by the ECB mandate as enshrined in the Treaty. In that respect, the strict separation between monetary and supervisory functions is instrumental in safeguarding against potential conflicts of interest between these two functions. Moreover, finishing the repair process requires actions in other policy areas. At the European level, the most pressing is to complete the Banking Union. An effective Single Resolution Mechanism is particularly important, as it will further reduce the sovereign-bank nexus and thus work towards the elimination of fragmentation across national borders. But fixing the financial system is not a sufficient condition for economy recovery. Healthy banks can better intermediate between those who save and those who want to invest, and are thereby necessary for future growth. Yet, proper framework conditions need to be in place so that the right incentives to invest exist. For example, it is important that firms can flexibly adjust to changing economic conditions, and that excessive rents in sheltered sectors do not distort the allocation of capital. Creating such framework conditions is largely the responsibility of national policies. Let me therefore now turn to the national dimension of the reform process.At the time of the sovereign crisis, the most pressing preoccupation of national governments was to repair public finances and restore the trust of financial markets. Therefore, fiscal consolidation was necessarily their first priority, and the national reactions in this domain were both forceful and effective. Let me remind you of some key facts. Between 2010 and 2013 Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Cyprus requested financial assistance from the EU and the IMF. These programmes involved far-reaching economic and financial policy adjustments. Other countries that had been hit by a confidence crisis, such as Spain and Italy, chose to undertake similar corrections. Spain also requested ESM programme for its financial sector.As a result, structural fiscal balances (i.e. fiscal balances excluding the impact of the cycle and one-off costs) improved significantly in all these countries. From 2010 to 2013 this improvement was equal to about 15 percentage points in Greece, 6.5 percentage points in Portugal, 6.0 percentage points in Spain, 5.5 percentage points in Ireland and 4.0 percentage points in Italy. Some of these adjustments are unparalleled in scale from a historical perspective. These fiscal corrections took place at a time when confidence had reached its lowest level, private sector saving ratios were sharply increasing, banks had to deleverage and access to finance by firms and households was impaired. The short-term costs in economic and social terms were therefore high. Yet, those costs were also elevated by the fact that most of the stressed countries had entered the crisis with rigid institutions and economic structures. As a consequence, the necessary adjustment of prices and costs to restore competitiveness was slow, which exacerbated the negative impact on activity. Nominal rigidities increased the real cost of the adjustment and the burden has often been borne by the more vulnerable members of society. A key complement to fiscal adjustment has therefore been structural reform. In several countries a series of bold structural reforms have been implemented. In Portugal in particular, the reform agenda has been broad-based and far-reaching. It has included public administration, health and pension systems, education, judicial systems, competition frameworks, industrial relations, labour markets, energy markets, network industries, services sectors and regulated professions. The overall approach to structural reforms in stressed countries has been to proceed in a comprehensive manner. This is not only because certain reforms are mutually complementary – for example, the competitiveness benefits of a labour market reform may not materialise without accompanying product market reforms, as wages adjust but prices do not – but also because an encompassing approach ensures that the burden of reform is spread more fairly across society.However, implementation obstacles to this approach have been significantly higher than initially expected. In general, it has been easier to change institutions and rules in the labour market than in product markets; it has been easier to change rules for “outsiders” than denting the vested interests of established “insiders”; and it has been easier to increase taxes rather than cutting expenditure. While these difficulties are in many cases gradually being overcome, the process is far for completed. Still, one should not underestimate the achievements so far.Let me give you a few examples: Looking at a well-established summary indicator of employment protection, the OECD index, Portugal, Spain and Greece have recorded notable improvements in 2013. In these three countries labour market institutions are currently assessed to be more flexible than in Luxembourg, Italy, France, Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands. This should help achieve a balance of employment protection that gives both stability – encouraging workers to invest in firm-specific skills – and mobility – allowing for reallocation between productive and non-productive sectors. [1]These same countries have also introduced several measures to help connect wage levels more closely with actual productivity developments. The link between collective bargaining and economic conditions has been strengthened by the possibility for more firm-level agreements. In Greece, wage floors have been significantly reduced to boost youth employment creation; in Portugal, they have been frozen and overtime pay considerably reduced. Wage indexation has become less prominent in Spain and in Cyprus it has been abolished.In all these countries the labour market reforms have started to have an impact on private sector wages. Private sector compensation per employee has fallen significantly in Greece since 2011, correcting what was an unsustainable increase prior to crisis, and it has also started to adjust in Spain, Portugal and Cyprus in 2012-13. I fully recognise the difficulties this process creates, yet this has to be set against the need for wages to adjust to reduce unemployment and restore external competitiveness. We are expecting that that these positive effects will dominate going forward and help employment to begin recovering in the near future.In parallel, all programme countries have strengthened their active labour market policies, including by fostering traineeship programmes and dual-apprenticeship systems, also with the support of EU funds. This is important, as having an adequate social safety net and job search and retraining programmes can reduce unemployment duration and so lower the long-term costs of an adjustment phase. There is also a fairness dimension: we should not forget that some citizens paid high entry costs to enter previously closed professions, for example by purchasing expensive licences, and may now need help transitioning to new employment.Product market reforms have generally aimed at improving competition in network industries – energy, telecommunication, transport – and highly regulated professions, as well as reducing administrative (licencing) burdens to wholesale and retail trade and provisions of services. Such reforms have tended to face greater implementation obstacles than labour market measures, partly owing to the micro or sector-specific dimension of the reform needs. This has required policymakers to confront more concentrated opposition from vested interests within the sector that is subject to reform.However, among programme countries, Portugal has some impressive achievements to show in terms improving product market functioning and economic framework conditions. These have included the change of competition law and the regulatory framework, the reform of the judicial system, and the reform of regulated professions and of the housing market. Finally, programme targets for privatisation were achieved ahead of time. As I said at the start of my remarks, an improvement of the underlying prospects for these economies has moved expectations. Perceptions about the sustainability of the recovery path in Portugal, in particular, have been reflected in persistent improvements in confidence and associated reductions in risk premia. Over time the economic and social pay-offs of reforms will be high, in terms of higher wealth and employment. High and sustainable GDP growth will in turn bring about improvements in fiscal positions and sizeable reductions in debt-to-GDP ratios in the medium to long-run, contributing therefore to long-term debt sustainability.However, to reap these benefits implies a long-term commitment. The reform process is a continuum. A reform that has just been legislated does nothing for the citizens of a country, if it is not followed-up with effective implementation. Making sure that reforms transfer from the statute book to the real economy requires painstaking monitoring, as well as a prompt reaction in case outcomes deviate from expectations. When countries exit adjustment programmes, such an orientation will help prove to markets that reforms have been undertaken not only due to external pressure, but also out of a genuine recognition of their benefits. This is the best way to ensure sustainable market access supported by a robust growth outlook. Recent empirical estimates based on the distance-to-frontier approach show the gains that could still be achieved. In Portugal, closing the gap from best practices via a fast implementation of product, labour and welfare state reforms would lead to an increase in per-capita GDP by 13.5% in 10 years. [2] In these projections, not only the pace of implementation matters, but also the degree of ambitiousness. If reforms target only a partial closure of the gap vis-à-vis the best performers then of course the GDP gains will also be reduced. All this points to the need to establish a clear link between notional reforms and actual outcomes via an outcome-based accountability framework, which can increase or make more effective the implementation process.Despite difficulties, the impetus for reform has been strong in the stressed countries, while it has been much weaker in the rest of the euro area. This is the natural outcome of a crisis-driven reform process. However, the crisis has clearly shown that a strategy of postponing reforms is self-defeating, as it contributed to the accumulation of imbalances and vulnerabilities in good times and increased the cost of adjustment in bad times.It is therefore crucial that the reform process is strengthened in all euro area countries, also those not affected by the crisis. Research has shown that undertaking coordinated reforms in all countries can boost GDP more than in a situation where each country acts alone. [3] A more widespread approach to reforms in all euro area countries can therefore contribute to a stronger recovery in the stressed countries and in the euro area as a whole, through positive supply and demand effects. Let me conclude.The euro area has come a long way in addressing its problems. The progress that has been made is remarkable and covers a wide range of areas and actors. The ECB has been central in stabilising the euro area economy, smoothing the adjustment process of the stressed countries and restoring the proper functioning of the monetary transmission channel. At the supra-national level, EU governance has been strengthened and, in particular, the Banking Union is being established. And at national level, progress is ongoing towards restoring fiscal soundness and driving forward structural reforms.The pay-off from these reforms is becoming increasingly visible: in 2013, we already saw signs of a turnaround in most euro area countries. In Portugal, real GDP has started its recovery path, fiscal developments have been positive and the unemployment rate has started to fall. And consumer and business confidence has been on an upward trend for many months. A similar improvement in confidence has also occurred in other countries that had been affected by the crisis. Expectations regarding incomes and employment are steadily being upgraded. This is a sign that households and firms are starting to internalise the benefits of the reforms implemented so far. Looking ahead, the task of all euro area policymakers is to ensure that the improvement in confidence will be validated by actual outcomes. If implementation of structural reforms is pursued ambitiously and the reform momentum upheld, it seems likely that growth will surprise on the upside in the coming years.[1]Blanchard, O., F. Jaumotte, and P. Loungani (2013), ‘Labor Market Policies and IMF Advice in Advanced Economies During the Great Recession’, IMF Research Department [2]See R. Bouis and R. Duval (2011),  Raising Potential Growth after the Crisis: A quantitative Assessment of the Potential Gains from Various Structural reforms in the OECD Area and Beyond, OECD Economic Department Working Papers No. 835, OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5kgk9qj18s8n-en. Fast implementation refers to phasing-in over 5-years, while slow implementation refers to phasing-in over 10-years.[3]See Varga J., J. in’t Ved (2013), The growth impact of structural reforms, Quarterly Report on the Euro Area, European Commission Vol. 12/4, page 17-27.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",great pleasur portug today see sign stabilis economi econom activ recov unemploy rate fall although high level current account surplus take year scar left crisi economi societi fade confid steadili improv recent month real gdp grow posit rate sinc second quarter recent inform industri product sale merchandis trade confirm trend continu euro area countri hit hard crisi also begin recoveri path financi market start benign price sovereign privat credit risk thank progress made macroeconom structur financi repair sinc onset financi crisi especi sinc mid start sovereign debt crisi decis action taken nation european level first part remark today would like give overview key measur taken respons crisi focus role play ecb monetari polici critic avert sever econom calam ecb also made wider contribut contribut activ debat deepen emu promot progress toward euro area new financi architectur bank union work strengthen euro area complet howev would like focus second part intervent specif would like ask step need embark path robust growth stress nonstress economi know achiev high sustain growth indispens bring unemploy rate back accept level support debt sustain happen euro area whole need persever effort reform econom fabric process structur reform demand therefor requir longterm commit strong ownership success let start briefli review evolut crisi euro area broad speak crisi two main phase first phase began bankruptci file lehman brother septemb euro area share global liquid crunch larg import abroad second phase began may sovereign crisi localis euro area partial export world economi second phase arguabl pernici monetari union repric sovereign risk euro area spread greec vulner economi sovereign privat debt vice versa process liquid crunch morph system crisi bank sector number member countri integr monetari union whole tradit exposur bank vulner countri sovereign issuer becam quick carrier financi contagion sovereign bond hold depreci erod capit eye creditor advers sovereignbank feedback loop interact exist vulner countri persist competit loss associ larg current account deficit case portug particular sensit revers extern financ exacerb capit flight core economi start deplet bank deposit vulner countri concern system sovereign issuer may lose market access fed fear may forc redeem liabil currenc differ euro thus de facto leav euro area redenomin fear becam new sourc market anxieti risk unwarr concern would becom selffulfil spectr destruct tail scenario loom context process financi integr evolv rapid pace sinc incept euro partial revers give way fragment interbank financi fragment per se new phenomenon postlehman world howev sever stage sovereign crisi fractur across euro area idiosyncrat system ran along nation border revers integr process risk undo one key benefit common currenc fragment led impair monetari polici transmiss mechan monetari impuls ecb swift introduc respons rise risk price stabil longer transmit uniform throughout entir euro area ecb brought offici polici interest rate histor low number countri posit take advantag monetari accommod bank countri tighten credit condit run monetari polici intent central bank negat repercuss access financ particular small mediums enterpris translat drag econom recoveri result singl monetari polici longer ensur pose signific challeng ecb polici conduct ecb respond forc challeng number standard nonstandard monetari polici measur main purpos nonstandard measur reduc financi fragment restor appropri function monetari polici across euro area particular measur gear toward remov two sourc risk premia bank fund risk redenomin fear higher fund risk bank symptom crisi ever sinc liquid strain first emerg almost overnight summer escal system proport lehman demis sinc onset crisi ecb mainstay respons problem twofold polici unlimit provis liquid fix interest rate elig collater week main refinanc longerterm oper extens matur liquid oper month year dual approach crisi manag reinforc two initi first collater rule adapt various stage view broaden pool asset bank could mobilis eurosystem liquid provis process complement fixedratefullallot decis alway balanc need support counterparti goal exercis appropri degre risk control protect balanc sheet incident portugues bank great benefit measur instanc abl strengthen collater buffer mobilis addit credit claim purpos obtain eurosystem liquid effect bank system euro area second refinanc risk face euro area bank minimis give reassur monetari polici remain accommod extend period time cours reassur taken two form condit forward guidanc level direct polici rate futur pledg maintain fixedratewithfullallot polici long need least mid measur prove power address fund risk face counterparti throughout crisi evidenc exampl signific declin money market term premia address redenomin fear premia howev alien central bank therefor requir new approach outright monetari transact omt initi innov instrument deploy remov breakup fear market price sovereign credit risk promot regular financi condit initi prove extrem effect instrument reduc fraction sovereign spread reflect compens redenomin fear also contribut general improv fund condit corpor bank individu across euro area sum nonstandard measur ecb help eas liquid pressur euro area general continu play pivot role allevi fund constraint portugues bank particular seen consist sign bank portug visibl within stress countri start pass eas stimulus onto custom firm household monetari polici measur would less effect flank serious drive toward financi reform key element ambiti reform agenda bank union probabl ambiti encompass reform eu architectur sinc institut singl currenc success complet bank union help address bank fund fragment structur way give concret support credit suppli condit throughout euro area let explain creation singl supervisori mechan ssm centr ecb bank subject homogen set rule procedur make standard prudenti supervis euro area compar even appli consequ supervis act sourc integr rather often case past addit caus fragment preliminari step need ssm oper full first import precondit full inform balanc sheet euro area bank sector much devot comprehens assess condit bank sector asset qualiti review aqr central build block assess precondit restor confid bank system euro area transpar bank balanc sheet help reviv privat investor interest maintain increas exposur euro area bank inde expect serious comprehens assess alreadi reinforc posit trend financi market look forward strengthen bank fund posit equiti debt side result exercis help support credit provis product sector clear benefit econom growth euro area ecb therefor also play role repair financi sector new supervisori function howev clear limit ecb limit defin ecb mandat enshrin treati respect strict separ monetari supervisori function instrument safeguard potenti conflict interest two function moreov finish repair process requir action polici area european level press complet bank union effect singl resolut mechan particular import reduc sovereignbank nexus thus work toward elimin fragment across nation border fix financi system suffici condit economi recoveri healthi bank better intermedi save want invest therebi necessari futur growth yet proper framework condit need place right incent invest exist exampl import firm flexibl adjust chang econom condit excess rent shelter sector distort alloc capit creat framework condit larg respons nation polici let therefor turn nation dimens reform process time sovereign crisi press preoccup nation govern repair public financ restor trust financi market therefor fiscal consolid necessarili first prioriti nation reaction domain forc effect let remind key fact greec ireland portug cyprus request financi assist eu imf programm involv farreach econom financi polici adjust countri hit confid crisi spain itali chose undertak similar correct spain also request esm programm financi sector result structur fiscal balanc e fiscal balanc exclud impact cycl oneoff cost improv signific countri improv equal percentag point greec percentag point portug percentag point spain percentag point ireland percentag point itali adjust unparallel scale histor perspect fiscal correct took place time confid reach lowest level privat sector save ratio sharpli increas bank deleverag access financ firm household impair shortterm cost econom social term therefor high yet cost also elev fact stress countri enter crisi rigid institut econom structur consequ necessari adjust price cost restor competit slow exacerb negat impact activ nomin rigid increas real cost adjust burden often born vulner member societi key complement fiscal adjust therefor structur reform sever countri seri bold structur reform implement portug particular reform agenda broadbas farreach includ public administr health pension system educ judici system competit framework industri relat labour market energi market network industri servic sector regul profess overal approach structur reform stress countri proceed comprehens manner certain reform mutual complementari exampl competit benefit labour market reform may materialis without accompani product market reform wage adjust price also encompass approach ensur burden reform spread fair across societi howev implement obstacl approach signific higher initi expect general easier chang institut rule labour market product market easier chang rule outsid dent vest interest establish insid easier increas tax rather cut expenditur difficulti mani case gradual overcom process far complet still one underestim achiev far let give exampl look wellestablish summari indic employ protect oecd index portug spain greec record notabl improv three countri labour market institut current assess flexibl luxembourg itali franc germani belgium netherland help achiev balanc employ protect give stabil encourag worker invest firmspecif skill mobil allow realloc product nonproduct sector countri also introduc sever measur help connect wage level close actual product develop link collect bargain econom condit strengthen possibl firmlevel agreement greec wage floor signific reduc boost youth employ creation portug frozen overtim pay consider reduc wage index becom less promin spain cyprus abolish countri labour market reform start impact privat sector wage privat sector compens per employe fallen signific greec sinc correct unsustain increas prior crisi also start adjust spain portug cyprus fulli recognis difficulti process creat yet set need wage adjust reduc unemploy restor extern competit expect posit effect domin go forward help employ begin recov near futur parallel programm countri strengthen activ labour market polici includ foster traineeship programm dualapprenticeship system also support eu fund import adequ social safeti net job search retrain programm reduc unemploy durat lower longterm cost adjust phase also fair dimens forget citizen paid high entri cost enter previous close profess exampl purchas expens licenc may need help transit new employ product market reform general aim improv competit network industri energi telecommun transport high regul profess well reduc administr licenc burden wholesal retail trade provis servic reform tend face greater implement obstacl labour market measur part owe micro sectorspecif dimens reform need requir policymak confront concentr opposit vest interest within sector subject reform howev among programm countri portug impress achiev show term improv product market function econom framework condit includ chang competit law regulatori framework reform judici system reform regul profess hous market final programm target privatis achiev ahead time said start remark improv under prospect economi move expect percept sustain recoveri path portug particular reflect persist improv confid associ reduct risk premia time econom social payoff reform high term higher wealth employ high sustain gdp growth turn bring improv fiscal posit sizeabl reduct debttogdp ratio medium longrun contribut therefor longterm debt sustain howev reap benefit impli longterm commit reform process continuum reform legisl noth citizen countri followedup effect implement make sure reform transfer statut book real economi requir painstak monitor well prompt reaction case outcom deviat expect countri exit adjust programm orient help prove market reform undertaken due extern pressur also genuin recognit benefit best way ensur sustain market access support robust growth outlook recent empir estim base distancetofronti approach show gain could still achiev portug close gap best practic via fast implement product labour welfar state reform would lead increas percapita gdp year project pace implement matter also degre ambiti reform target partial closur gap visàvi best perform cours gdp gain also reduc point need establish clear link notion reform actual outcom via outcomebas account framework increas make effect implement process despit difficulti impetus reform strong stress countri much weaker rest euro area natur outcom crisisdriven reform process howev crisi clear shown strategi postpon reform selfdef contribut accumul imbal vulner good time increas cost adjust bad time therefor crucial reform process strengthen euro area countri also affect crisi research shown undertak coordin reform countri boost gdp situat countri act alon widespread approach reform euro area countri therefor contribut stronger recoveri stress countri euro area whole posit suppli demand effect let conclud euro area come long way address problem progress made remark cover wide rang area actor ecb central stabilis euro area economi smooth adjust process stress countri restor proper function monetari transmiss channel supran level eu govern strengthen particular bank union establish nation level progress ongo toward restor fiscal sound drive forward structur reform payoff reform becom increas visibl alreadi saw sign turnaround euro area countri portug real gdp start recoveri path fiscal develop posit unemploy rate start fall consum busi confid upward trend mani month similar improv confid also occur countri affect crisi expect regard incom employ steadili upgrad sign household firm start internalis benefit reform implement far look ahead task euro area policymak ensur improv confid valid actual outcom implement structur reform pursu ambiti reform momentum upheld seem like growth surpris upsid come year blanchard o f jaumott p loungani labor market polici imf advic advanc economi great recess imf research depart see r boui r duval rais potenti growth crisi quantit assess potenti gain various structur reform oecd area beyond oecd econom depart work paper oecd publish http dx doi org kgk qj nen fast implement refer phasingin year slow implement refer phasingin year see varga j j ved growth impact structur reform quarter report euro area european commiss vol page reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en