"Jürgen Stark: Productivity, structural reforms and globalisation",11-10-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,5297,"<p>It is a great pleasure to be here today and talk to you about the economic situation and outlook for the euro area economy. Nowadays the two big questions which many people have in mind when they think about this topic are: is the euro area economy at a turning point? And: what can we do to move to a path of high, sustainable growth? In my presentation, I will share some thoughts with you and provide some tentative answers. I will look at these issues from a particular angle.First, I would like to discuss the recent economic developments and the uncertainty we face regarding the economic outlook. Part of the uncertainty relates to the assessment of labour productivity developments, which will be the main topic of the second part of my speech. Labour productivity is a, or even the, driving force behind economic growth. Assessing trends in labour productivity is therefore important, but it remains also a complicated task in real time. I will provide you with some evidence which shapes our assessment of recent productivity developments and put it into the context of the long-term slowdown that can be observed for the euro area. Future productivity performance will depend on the ability of governments to put into place the right policies and the ability of euro area economies to cope with the challenges of globalisation. This topic will conclude my talk today.Growth in economic activity in the euro area accelerated during 2006 and remained strong in the first half of 2007 after a prolonged period of subdued growth, which began in 2001. Global economic growth was very dynamic, in particular in emerging Asia and with high growth rates in the new EU Member States. Moreover, different domestic demand components gained momentum. Investment dynamics benefited from an extended period of favourable financing conditions, balance sheet restructuring, strong corporate earnings and gains in business efficiency. Consumption also strengthened further, in line with the developments in real disposable income, which was increasingly supported by employment growth and improving labour market conditions.Employment in the euro area increased by more than two million in 2006, an increase which was in line with the pattern of economic growth and contained real wages reflecting the impact of recent labour market policy measures. Employment growth was fairly evenly spread across age, gender and skill groups. It was marked by a significant rise in both permanent and full-time jobs and stopped the decline in employment among low-skilled workers. Thus it went beyond the increase in the employment rate among female and older workers as well as temporary and part-time job ratios observable in previous years. The strength of employment growth also translated into a sizeable reduction in the unemployment rate.Turning to more recent developments, much of the information that has become available confirms the good fundamentals of the euro area economy as well as the sustained pace of economic growth, although it has moderated slightly from the rates observed in the second half of 2006. However, preliminary data for the third quarter show strong industrial production and growth in the services sector remains solid. Also, labour market dynamics continue to be robust, thereby supporting private consumption growth. Corporate earnings and profitability have also been sustained. Data on activity from various confidence indicators and indicator-based estimates have declined but remain favourable. Survey indicators for the euro area services sector deteriorated on account of disappointing recent demand and the EC survey on consumer and business confidence dropped in September. The decline in confidence was reflected in all sectors apart from construction. While financial market volatility appears to have contributed to this decline, these indicators remain above their historical averages and therefore continue to point to sustained growth during the second half of 2007. The recent financial turmoil has generally raised the degree of uncertainty about the outlook for economic activity in the euro area. Particular caution needs to be exercised when assessing any impact of financial market developments on the real economy. It thus remains necessary to gather additional information and examine new data before drawing further conclusions. The overall impact will depend on spillovers from the effects of financial market turbulence on the US economy and on global demand. In the euro area, it will largely depend on how the upheaval affects financing conditions and domestic demand. Regarding demand in the euro area, I already mentioned that, at this stage, there is little evidence of an impact beyond the decline in confidence indicators.As for financing conditions, in our view the higher risk premia now embedded in stock prices and corporate bond prices largely reflect a correction of the past under-appreciation of risk. Debt and equity financing costs in markets and via monetary and financial institutions have increased in recent months, although corporate bond spreads are still not exceptionally high by historical standards. Moreover, heightened financial uncertainty seems, so far, to have led only to a limited ‘flight to safety’. Credit growth to households and especially corporations remains strong, although this may reflect, in part, the re-intermediation of financing onto bank balance sheets. The results of the October 2007 Bank Lending Survey suggest that euro area banks tightened somewhat credit standards applied to loans to households and firms in the third quarter of 2007 and expect to tighten them further in this quarter. However, more data are required to obtain a more comprehensive view of the impact of the financial market turbulence on financing conditions and money as well as credit growth.The uncertainty about financial institutions’ potential exposure to US sub-prime-related losses and to the valuation techniques of complicated structured credit products, however, does appear to have led to a lack of confidence among banks and thus tensions in the interbank money market. The ECB immediately reacted to the market tensions and continues to contribute to the smooth operation of money markets. Turning to global demand factors, global economic activity remains resilient so far despite the turmoil. The impact of the US economic slowdown on world demand (and euro area foreign demand) has been largely offset by robust economic growth in emerging economies. But the financial turmoil has increased downside risks to the global economic outlook, intensifying those already stemming from possible further increases in oil and commodity prices, rising protectionist pressures and broader concerns about global imbalances. Against this background, international organisations and private forecasters have in fact been recently revising their projections for economic growth slightly downwards.Let me now turn briefly to recent price developments and the outlook for inflation. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, the annual HICP inflation rate increased strongly to 2.1% in September 2007, from 1.7% in August, having been below 2% for 12 consecutive months. A particularly strong effect from the decline of energy prices a year ago, combined with the recent substantial increase in oil prices, contributed significantly to this increase. Owing to this effect, we are now entering a period during which we expect the inflation rate to remain significantly above 2% in the remaining months of 2007 and in early 2008, before moderating again.Looking at the performance of different HICP components shows that inflation remains high in unprocessed food – although it declined slightly to 2.4% in August – and in services prices. The acceleration of services prices since the start of the year, now standing at an elevated level of 2.6% for the fourth consecutive month, is partly explained by the impact of the rise in German VAT, but is also linked to the better ability of firms to pass higher costs on to customers. Capacity utilisation has risen over the past two years for manufacturing and services. Indicators suggest that it is still increasing in the services sector, and that price pressures along the production chain have strengthened further.On food prices, I would like to make a small incidental remark. Food prices appear to be among the most important factors affecting the inflation perception of people. In Germany, as in other countries, the strong attention paid to food prices was certainly also supported by the press coverage of the issue. The overall contribution of food prices to actual inflation, however, is limited by their weight in the overall euro area HICP, which is approximately 12% for processed food and 8% for unprocessed food. This is one of the reasons why, at times, some discrepancies between the perceived inflation rate and actual inflation may emerge. [1] Of course in our economic analysis, we have to take actual price developments and people’s expectations affecting their spending and savings behaviour into account.Risks to the outlook for price developments remain on the upside. They continue to include the possibility of further increases in the prices of oil and agricultural products as well as additional increases in administered prices and indirect taxes beyond those announced thus far. Moreover, taking into account the existence of capacity constraints, the favourable momentum of real GDP growth observed over the past few quarters and the signs of a further tightening of labour markets, with labour shortages increasingly being mentioned in surveys as a source of concern in the industry and services sectors, suggests that stronger than currently expected wage developments may occur. This may be coupled with an increase in the pricing power in market segments with low competition. Such developments would pose upward risks to price stability. It is therefore crucial that all parties concerned meet their responsibilities. The ECB always cross-checks its assessment of price stability emerging from the economic analysis with the indications about medium to longer-term risks apparent from our monetary analysis. Without going into the details – because some of the elements were already mentioned before, when I discussed financial market and credit conditions – let me just say that our current monetary analysis identifies continued strong underlying rates of money and credit expansion and thus confirms the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium to longer-term horizons. The current experience indeed confirms again the usefulness of the ECB’s approach. A broad assessment of underlying trends in money and credit growth is particularly important during the current period of financial market volatility, as the latter may increase the focus on short-term behaviour and developments at the expense of the necessarily medium-term orientation of monetary policy. At the same time, monetary and credit data can offer an important insight into how financial institutions, households and firms have responded to the financial market volatility. In this respect, monetary analysis adds significantly to the robustness of the assessment underlying our monetary policy decisions. In sum, available data suggests that economic activity in the euro area may continue to expand at rates close to potential output growth in the second half of 2007 and 2008. The sound fundamentals of the euro area economy – notably the healthy financial situation of the corporate sector and the strong labour market – bode well for a smooth absorption of the recent financial market turbulence. Global economic activity is expected to remain robust and to provide support for euro area exports and investment. Consumption in the euro area should contribute to growth in line with developments in real disposable income, as employment conditions remain supportive. At the same time, risks to price stability remain on the upside. There is, nevertheless, a high margin of uncertainty surrounding this outlook and risks for the economy are on the downside. They relate mainly to a potentially broader impact of the reappraisal of risk currently occurring in financial markets, possible disorderly developments related to global imbalances and protectionist pressures, as well as potential further oil and commodity price rises.One piece of the information jigsaw that the ECB puts together in its assessment of the economic situation and the outlook is the development of labour productivity. When we look at recent developments, data released by Eurostat in spring 2007 showed a clear acceleration in labour productivity growth (per person) in 2006, reaching 1.4% growth compared with 0.7% in 2005. In year-on-year terms, labour productivity growth peaked at 1.7% in the fourth quarter of 2006. At sectoral level, positive developments in labour productivity were mainly driven by developments in industry (excluding construction). However, labour productivity growth in the services sector also showed signs of improvement, recording an increase of 0.8% year on year. These positive developments were welcomed by some economists as a reversal of previous trends and were regarded as the outcome of the successful implementation of recent market reforms. At the ECB, we were of the view that it was advisable to remain cautious as these developments may be cyclical. Unfortunately, the latest available national account data released by Eurostat in autumn 2007 have corroborated our concerns. The latest available data (see Table 1) show that labour productivity growth declined in the second quarter of 2007 and currently stands well below its peak at the end of 2006.What makes this development complicated, as I said before, is the fact that the assessment requires the short-term, cyclical element to be disentangled from the longer-term trends or structural changes. Labour productivity – that is the output per unit of labour (either in terms of persons or hours worked) – may change due to the amount of capital or machinery put at the service of workers, technological progress or managerial efficiency gains, or the current economic situation leading to higher or lower capacity utilisation. Disentangling the short and longer-term nature of changes in all these factors in real time is probably difficult at company level, but even more complex at an aggregate level for sectors and the economy at the whole.In practice, we use a wide range of indicators, including some time-series techniques, for our assessment. Simple trend estimates extracted from macroeconomic time series tend to be unreliable. Therefore, rather than focusing on one or more of these summary indicators, a real-time economic analysis of the degree of permanent changes in productivity (or productivity trend) incorporates a broader set of indicators. From this perspective, several available indicators corroborate our view that the recent developments have to be seen rather as a cyclical phenomenon and not necessarily as a change in the underlying trend. First, our own estimates of trend labour productivity suggest that the trend has not shifted upwards by a big margin, if at all. Second, from a historical perspective, the pace of improvements in the services sector remains modest compared with that of the early 1990s. Third, although there has been a pick-up in the contribution made by innovation and other efficiency gains to labour productivity growth, this remains subdued by historical standards. Furthermore, the contribution from capital deepening, namely the growth in capital used per unit of labour, further suggests that recent developments in labour productivity may very well be associated with a cyclical pick-up in investment activity.What makes the development important is the fact that productivity is a prime determinant of the speed of output growth per capita in the long run. As long as economies cannot expand their workforce and the amount of people employed indefinitely, growth has to come mainly from higher productivity through technological progress. A trend increase in productivity should therefore be factored into our assessment of potential output and the current cyclical position of the economy. Labour productivity growth has also direct implications for people’s wealth. Higher levels of long-term productivity growth through technological advances imply better investment opportunities in the future. All else being equal, it should lead to lower prices and allow for higher wages, since workers are more productive. This would increase people’s expected income and affect their patterns of consumption.From this perspective, the assessment that recent productivity figures do not clearly point to a major ‘break’ with past developments is somewhat disenchanting since the euro area has been characterised by a sustained decline in labour productivity growth since the early 1960s. Measured per hour, labour productivity growth averaged 4.7% in the 1960s and 1970s, 2.2% in the 1980s and 1990s and around 1.3% at the beginning of this century. The slowdown in labour productivity growth in the euro area is a reflection of both lower growth in innovation and other efficiency gains (as proxied by the concept of total factor productivity, TFP) and lower growth in capital (i.e. machinery) used per unit of labour. From 1996 to 2004 the contribution to growth from capital deepening in the euro area was 0.9 percentage point, while it was 1.3 between 1980 and 1995.When assessing the long-term slowdown, we have to take into account the fact that the reduction in the growth rate of capital deepening can probably be seen as the flip side of the employment-rich growth which we experienced over recent years. This reflects an environment of wage moderation and progress with labour market reforms which may have partly reversed the earlier trend to substitute labour, which had become more expensive due to wage increases outpacing productivity gains, in favour of capital, in the 1980s and early 1990s.The slowdown appears more disappointing in view of the fact that it contrasts sharply with the very positive developments in labour productivity in other major economies, most noticeably the United States. The second half of the 1990s saw a period of sharp acceleration in productivity growth in the US (see Table 2). In the eyes of many observers, this was caused primarily by the innovations in the information and communication technology (ICT) sector. Together with the rapid pace of growth in the 1995-2000 period, it prompted some economists to suggest that the US economy was ready to pursue a new path of rapid growth. You will remember when the idea of a ‘new economy’ emerged.The rate of growth of GDP in the euro area in the second half of the 1990s was significantly lower than in the US. Nonetheless, advocates of the new economy, i.e. believers in the radical implications that the new technologies have for potential growth, suggested that similar developments on this side of the Atlantic were likely to take place. The question is why this did not materialise.The contributions from ICT technologies (e.g. computers and the internet) to labour productivity growth come from three main sources: a direct contribution from the production of ICT capital, a direct contribution from the use of ICT capital in the production of goods and services, and indirectly from possible ‘spillover’ effects from the use of ICT capital. These ‘spillover’ effects amount, among other things, to the possibility of introducing more advanced management techniques in the production process. [2]When comparing the euro area with other major industrialised economies, we see (Table 2 in the Annex) that the direct contribution from ICT capital increased in both periods between 1980 and 1995 and between 1995 and 2004 in the euro area, the United States and the United Kingdom, but remains at a higher level in the United States and the United Kingdom. In addition, it is commonly acknowledged that the higher TFP growth, in particular in the US, reflects at least partly the spillovers from the development and adoption of ICT technologies as a so-called “general purpose technology” that affects the entire production sector. [3]When looking at euro area productivity at sectoral level, we do not find any immediate evidence for such spillover effects in the non-high-tech ICT producing sectors [4] (see Table 3): First, the performance of traditional non-high-tech manufacturing industries deteriorated significantly. This is responsible for most of the labour productivity slowdown in the euro area. Second, the performance of non-high-tech services remained weak. While its contribution in relative terms is not as sizeable as that from the traditional manufacturing industries, this, however, should come as little consolation, as in absolute terms, labour productivity growth in these services industries has remained subdued. This is the more so when compared with developments in the US, which saw a large acceleration in productivity, especially in these industries, over the same period. [5]Overall, there may be various forces underlying the slowdown, and I do not claim that my presentation provides a fully comprehensive picture. From the pattern of slowdown in the euro area, we can nevertheless conclude, when comparing with other industrialised economies, that one major reason lies in the failure of major euro area countries to take full advantage of new technologies or, at least, their lagged adjustment to the situation. Why might Europe have been less able to participate in the productivity pick-up and is it doomed to follow a continued slowdown? The performance of European countries can be traced back to existing policies and market rigidities. Policies have changed over the last decade and the impact of these policy reforms is partly visible, but the structural reforms identified in the Lisbon agenda still have the potential to further increase both labour productivity growth and therefore the long-term growth potential of the European economy. Major structural reforms are obviously not easy to achieve and require a high degree of ‘national ownership’ and commitment to the reform objectives agreed under the Lisbon process. The initiative of entrepreneurs has often been essential – certainly in Germany – in putting reform proposals on the agenda and keeping up the pressure to get them implemented. The role played by research and development and education is key for innovation. Promoting R&D investment includes a better use of public procurement, more innovation-friendly regulation and stepping up the provision of targeted fiscal incentives to the private sector. Finland is currently the only country in the euro area which complies with the Lisbon target of 3% spending on R&D. Adequate systems to support R&D are of course not only a quantitative issue; increasing the efficiency of research at the same time is essential. A highly educated labour force fosters prospects for innovation and facilitates the adoption of new technologies from abroad. [6] In my view, a healthy economic environment consists of well-functioning product markets. This means an environment where competitive forces will reduce price margins, and therefore entrepreneurs have a strong incentive to allocate their resources in the most efficient way. An additional channel through which competition has an impact on labour productivity is via enhanced innovation, for when competitive pressures are strong there are more incentives to innovate so as to gain an advantage over rivals.Numerous economic studies have documented the positive link between competition and innovation. [7] Against this background, it can be said that the removal of barriers to competition should be a policy priority of the European Commission. Some steps have been taken and their fruits are already visible. For example, the recent reforms implemented in the telecommunications sector show up in their high levels of labour productivity growth (see Table 3). It is also reassuring to know that most euro area countries have passed competition laws which are comparable in depth with the best legal frameworks available to other major OECD countries. With the exception of agricultural products, these countries score equally well in reducing trade restrictions and in not imposing excessive restrictions on foreign direct investment. However, more remains to be done as regards the pursuit of effective competition in the energy market and the implementation of the Services Directive.Increasing competition, of course, also means that innovation needs appropriate protection. Incentives to invest in innovation would completely vanish if rewards were to be fully shared with competitors due to spillover effects and if the rights associated with the investment were left unprotected. Laws to protect property rights and the strict international enforcement of these laws remain indispensable.A competitive and well-developed financial system is also a key to enhancing growth prospects. [8] A modern financial system boosts economic efficiency by channelling resources to the most profitable activities. A process of European financial integration is gradually taking place and considerable progress has been made, for instance, in capital markets and wholesale banking. However, the retail banking sector does not appear to have reached its potential yet, and competition seems insufficient in this area; it leaves European consumers and small and medium-sized enterprises unable to take full advantage of the benefits of EMU and the Single Market.Inflexible labour markets have also been blamed for the labour productivity slowdown in the euro area. Labour market rigidities discourage the effective reallocation of labour. For example, it has been argued that American workers tend to invest more in general human capital, while European workers favour specific human capital investments. This may be partly linked to the fact that workers in the US have little unemployment protection and low unemployment benefits. On this score, employment protection legislation may have a particularly strong negative impact on industries subject to rapid technological change since it may preclude efficient matching of workers to jobs in view of new job requirements. Unfortunately, progress in increasing contractual flexibility, in particular for permanent workers, has been disappointingly slow in several euro area countries.Labour market flexibility is not an issue of productivity growth only. Flexible labour markets in terms of wage and employment adjustment benefit both firms and workers. Contractual flexibility is essential in a world of technological change and globalisation – about which I will talk more in a minute – where workers can no longer count on job security. It enhances the opportunity to get into a new position and leads to higher employment security. Education and training systems need to help workers master transitions between jobs and keep up with technological developments. Flexible labour markets and efficient activation measures contribute to shorter periods of unemployment, which could otherwise lead to a decline in worker’s skills and productivity. Let me now turn to the link between globalisation and productivity growth. In essence, globalisation means the increased international economic interdependence and the rapid integration of several emerging economies into global trade and production networks that we have experienced in recent decades. However, it also includes the growing internationalisation of financial markets and capital movements, a phenomenon which has intensified since the mid-1990s. Globalisation brings clear benefits to the economy, but at the same time poses significant challenges.Let’s look at the benefits: first, trade liberalisation and globalisation enables an economy to obtain the cheapest products on the world market, and may, in turn, exert downward pressure on domestic prices through lower import prices, thereby increasing the real wealth of the importing economy. Globalisation implies welfare gains by having a dampening effect on consumer prices, while allowing producers to substitute cheaper intermediate goods, thereby increasing profit margins or improving their price competitiveness. Second, globalisation has certainly helped to stimulate competition in domestic markets and to increase and diversify euro area trade linkages. In 1995, two-thirds of extra-euro area manufacturing imports came from industrialised, high-cost countries, whereas in 2005 their share had declined to around 50%. The decrease is distributed among the traditional major euro area trade partners (the United Kingdom, Japan, the United States), while the shift towards emerging, low-cost economies is mainly accounted for by increased imports from China and, to a lesser extent, the new EU Member States. Third, and most importantly in the context of my presentation today, globalisation impacts on productivity through trade, capital mobility and the internationalisation of technology and R&D, which can lead to a reallocation of production processes. Trade increases incentives to specialise in higher- productivity sectors, produce economies of scale and encourages innovation. Inward and outward foreign direct investment implies opportunities to learn and adopt technologies and productivity-enhancing practices from abroad. At the same time, the internationalisation of R&D supports domestic innovation and technological progress. Immigration may also help to increase the matching efficiency of labour markets.However, it is also true that globalisation presents challenges. In order to reap its potential gains, globalisation requires economies to adjust to the reallocation of production and the new competition from emerging markets in certain sectors. The tremendously increased supply of products from emerging markets may induce a reorganisation of production in euro area countries. This strengthens the need for occupational mobility and the capacity to also absorb low-skilled labour in new sectors. The restructuring of the economy may lead to an at least temporary decrease in productivity, which would be more protracted the ‘stickier’ the economy and less able to overhaul traditional production structures. This may imply that those countries where the pace of reforms has been slow may find themselves, paradoxically, in a worse position than in the past. Economies with uncompetitive product markets and rigid labour markets not only fail to adjust to technological change, but are also more vulnerable to shocks associated with the globalisation process.I would like to conclude by saying that Europe is reforming its economy so as to adapt to the challenges of globalisation, technological change and ageing. Considerable progress has been achieved, as reflected in the significant rise in employment growth. Now the challenge is to also raise the level of productivity growth in all euro area countries. If this challenge is not met, it is hard to imagine that Europe will be able to achieve a higher growth path and to keep the wealth of its citizens. Monetary Union has been effective – and very successful – in supporting growth through a credible monetary policy which creates a stable macroeconomic environment and has lowered financing costs for a number of euro area countries through a reduction of risk premia.EMU, moreover, gives impetus to European integration, particularly in financial markets, and to a further reduction of the barriers to competition. The Lisbon process now provides the tools to address the challenge of fully reversing the previous slowdown through further structural reforms. It will require the firm commitment of governments, entrepreneurs and workers to be successful and meet this challenge. I am still highly optimistic that we will succeed.Table 1. Euro area labour productivity growth (annual % changes unless otherwise stated)Note: Labour productivity is measured as value added over total employment. Source: Eurostat.Table 2. Contributions to labour productivity growthNotes: LP growth stands for labour productivity growth per hour worked; TFP stands for total factor productivity. Sources: ECB calculations using EUKLEMS data.Table 3. Euro area labour productivity growth and contributions (annual average rates, in %)[1] For a further discussion see the article entitled “Measured inflation and inflation perception in the euro area” in the May 2007 issue of the Monthly Bulletin as well as the box on “Recent food price developments in world markets and the euro area” in the September 2007 issue of the Monthly Bulletin.[2] An early report from the OECD pointed to the potential consequences of the internet on TFP and expanded on the benefits that ICT brings in terms of new organisation of production and sales. See OECD (2000): A New Economy? The Changing Role of Innovation and Information Technology in Growth. Paris.[3] See Stiroh, K. J. (2002): ‘Are ICT Spillovers driving the new economy?’ Review of Income and Wealth, Series 48, No 1, March. [4]  Unfortunately, standard correlation analysis between aggregate TFP and ICT capital growth does not suffice to confirm the existence of spillover effects. Other factors apart from possible spillovers could also explain a possible correlation between ICT capital growth and changes in TFP. These other factors are: i) mismeasured production inputs, ii) omitted variables that are correlated with ICT capital, and iii) the possibility of increasing returns to scale or imperfect competition.[5] The primary sector contributed negatively to the slowdown despite its strong performance. However, its negative contribution is simply the outcome of the reallocation of labour to other industries in response to changes in domestic demand resulting from the completion of the modernisation process.[6] See J. Temple (2001): “Growth effects of education and social capital in the OECD countries”. OECD Economic Studies, No 33, pp. 57-101.[7] For a further extension of this topic see European Commission (2004), “The link between product market reforms and productivity: direct and indirect impacts”, the EU Economy: 2004 Review. Further evidence is also to be found in Griffith, R., R. Harrison and H. Simpson (2006): “The link between product market reform, innovation and EU macroeconomic performance”, DG-ECFIN Economic Papers No 243, February 2006.[8] See, for example, S. Claessens and L. Laeven (2005), “Financial sector competition, financial dependence and growth”, Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 3, pp. 179-207.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",great pleasur today talk econom situat outlook euro area economi nowaday two big question mani peopl mind think topic euro area economi turn point move path high sustain growth present share thought provid tentat answer look issu particular angl first would like discuss recent econom develop uncertainti face regard econom outlook part uncertainti relat assess labour product develop main topic second part speech labour product even drive forc behind econom growth assess trend labour product therefor import remain also complic task real time provid evid shape assess recent product develop put context longterm slowdown observ euro area futur product perform depend abil govern put place right polici abil euro area economi cope challeng globalis topic conclud talk today growth econom activ euro area acceler remain strong first half prolong period subdu growth began global econom growth dynam particular emerg asia high growth rate new eu member state moreov differ domest demand compon gain momentum invest dynam benefit extend period favour financ condit balanc sheet restructur strong corpor earn gain busi effici consumpt also strengthen line develop real dispos incom increas support employ growth improv labour market condit employ euro area increas two million increas line pattern econom growth contain real wage reflect impact recent labour market polici measur employ growth fair even spread across age gender skill group mark signific rise perman fulltim job stop declin employ among lowskil worker thus went beyond increas employ rate among femal older worker well temporari parttim job ratio observ previous year strength employ growth also translat sizeabl reduct unemploy rate turn recent develop much inform becom avail confirm good fundament euro area economi well sustain pace econom growth although moder slight rate observ second half howev preliminari data third quarter show strong industri product growth servic sector remain solid also labour market dynam continu robust therebi support privat consumpt growth corpor earn profit also sustain data activ various confid indic indicatorbas estim declin remain favour survey indic euro area servic sector deterior account disappoint recent demand ec survey consum busi confid drop septemb declin confid reflect sector apart construct financi market volatil appear contribut declin indic remain histor averag therefor continu point sustain growth second half recent financi turmoil general rais degre uncertainti outlook econom activ euro area particular caution need exercis assess impact financi market develop real economi thus remain necessari gather addit inform examin new data draw conclus overal impact depend spillov effect financi market turbul us economi global demand euro area larg depend upheav affect financ condit domest demand regard demand euro area alreadi mention stage littl evid impact beyond declin confid indic financ condit view higher risk premia embed stock price corpor bond price larg reflect correct past underappreci risk debt equiti financ cost market via monetari financi institut increas recent month although corpor bond spread still except high histor standard moreov heighten financi uncertainti seem far led limit flight safeti credit growth household especi corpor remain strong although may reflect part reintermedi financ onto bank balanc sheet result octob bank lend survey suggest euro area bank tighten somewhat credit standard appli loan household firm third quarter expect tighten quarter howev data requir obtain comprehens view impact financi market turbul financ condit money well credit growth uncertainti financi institut potenti exposur us subprimerel loss valuat techniqu complic structur credit product howev appear led lack confid among bank thus tension interbank money market ecb immedi react market tension continu contribut smooth oper money market turn global demand factor global econom activ remain resili far despit turmoil impact us econom slowdown world demand euro area foreign demand larg offset robust econom growth emerg economi financi turmoil increas downsid risk global econom outlook intensifi alreadi stem possibl increas oil commod price rise protectionist pressur broader concern global imbal background intern organis privat forecast fact recent revis project econom growth slight downward let turn briefli recent price develop outlook inflat accord eurostat flash estim annual hicp inflat rate increas strong septemb august consecut month particular strong effect declin energi price year ago combin recent substanti increas oil price contribut signific increas owe effect enter period expect inflat rate remain signific remain month earli moder look perform differ hicp compon show inflat remain high unprocess food although declin slight august servic price acceler servic price sinc start year stand elev level fourth consecut month part explain impact rise german vat also link better abil firm pass higher cost custom capac utilis risen past two year manufactur servic indic suggest still increas servic sector price pressur along product chain strengthen food price would like make small incident remark food price appear among import factor affect inflat percept peopl germani countri strong attent paid food price certain also support press coverag issu overal contribut food price actual inflat howev limit weight overal euro area hicp approxim process food unprocess food one reason time discrep perceiv inflat rate actual inflat may emerg cours econom analysi take actual price develop peopl expect affect spend save behaviour account risk outlook price develop remain upsid continu includ possibl increas price oil agricultur product well addit increas administ price indirect tax beyond announc thus far moreov take account exist capac constraint favour momentum real gdp growth observ past quarter sign tighten labour market labour shortag increas mention survey sourc concern industri servic sector suggest stronger current expect wage develop may occur may coupl increas price power market segment low competit develop would pose upward risk price stabil therefor crucial parti concern meet respons ecb alway crosscheck assess price stabil emerg econom analysi indic medium longerterm risk appar monetari analysi without go detail element alreadi mention discuss financi market credit condit let say current monetari analysi identifi continu strong under rate money credit expans thus confirm prevail upsid risk price stabil medium longerterm horizon current experi inde confirm use ecb approach broad assess under trend money credit growth particular import current period financi market volatil latter may increas focus shortterm behaviour develop expens necessarili mediumterm orient monetari polici time monetari credit data offer import insight financi institut household firm respond financi market volatil respect monetari analysi add signific robust assess under monetari polici decis sum avail data suggest econom activ euro area may continu expand rate close potenti output growth second half sound fundament euro area economi notabl healthi financi situat corpor sector strong labour market bode well smooth absorpt recent financi market turbul global econom activ expect remain robust provid support euro area export invest consumpt euro area contribut growth line develop real dispos incom employ condit remain support time risk price stabil remain upsid nevertheless high margin uncertainti surround outlook risk economi downsid relat main potenti broader impact reapprais risk current occur financi market possibl disord develop relat global imbal protectionist pressur well potenti oil commod price rise one piec inform jigsaw ecb put togeth assess econom situat outlook develop labour product look recent develop data releas eurostat spring show clear acceler labour product growth per person reach growth compar yearonyear term labour product growth peak fourth quarter sector level posit develop labour product main driven develop industri exclud construct howev labour product growth servic sector also show sign improv record increas year year posit develop welcom economist revers previous trend regard outcom success implement recent market reform ecb view advis remain cautious develop may cyclic unfortun latest avail nation account data releas eurostat autumn corrobor concern latest avail data see tabl show labour product growth declin second quarter current stand well peak end make develop complic said fact assess requir shortterm cyclic element disentangl longerterm trend structur chang labour product output per unit labour either term person hour work may chang due amount capit machineri put servic worker technolog progress manageri effici gain current econom situat lead higher lower capac utilis disentangl short longerterm natur chang factor real time probabl difficult compani level even complex aggreg level sector economi whole practic use wide rang indic includ timeseri techniqu assess simpl trend estim extract macroeconom time seri tend unreli therefor rather focus one summari indic realtim econom analysi degre perman chang product product trend incorpor broader set indic perspect sever avail indic corrobor view recent develop seen rather cyclic phenomenon necessarili chang under trend first estim trend labour product suggest trend shift upward big margin second histor perspect pace improv servic sector remain modest compar earli third although pickup contribut made innov effici gain labour product growth remain subdu histor standard furthermor contribut capit deepen name growth capit use per unit labour suggest recent develop labour product may well associ cyclic pickup invest activ make develop import fact product prime determin speed output growth per capita long run long economi cannot expand workforc amount peopl employ indefinit growth come main higher product technolog progress trend increas product therefor factor assess potenti output current cyclic posit economi labour product growth also direct implic peopl wealth higher level longterm product growth technolog advanc impli better invest opportun futur els equal lead lower price allow higher wage sinc worker product would increas peopl expect incom affect pattern consumpt perspect assess recent product figur clear point major break past develop somewhat disench sinc euro area characteris sustain declin labour product growth sinc earli measur per hour labour product growth averag around begin centuri slowdown labour product growth euro area reflect lower growth innov effici gain proxi concept total factor product tfp lower growth capit e machineri use per unit labour contribut growth capit deepen euro area percentag point assess longterm slowdown take account fact reduct growth rate capit deepen probabl seen flip side employmentrich growth experienc recent year reflect environ wage moder progress labour market reform may part revers earlier trend substitut labour becom expens due wage increas outpac product gain favour capit earli slowdown appear disappoint view fact contrast sharpli posit develop labour product major economi notic unit state second half saw period sharp acceler product growth us see tabl eye mani observ caus primarili innov inform communic technolog ict sector togeth rapid pace growth period prompt economist suggest us economi readi pursu new path rapid growth rememb idea new economi emerg rate growth gdp euro area second half signific lower us nonetheless advoc new economi e believ radic implic new technolog potenti growth suggest similar develop side atlant like take place question materialis contribut ict technolog e g comput internet labour product growth come three main sourc direct contribut product ict capit direct contribut use ict capit product good servic indirect possibl spillov effect use ict capit spillov effect amount among thing possibl introduc advanc manag techniqu product process compar euro area major industrialis economi see tabl annex direct contribut ict capit increas period euro area unit state unit kingdom remain higher level unit state unit kingdom addit common acknowledg higher tfp growth particular us reflect least part spillov develop adopt ict technolog socal general purpos technolog affect entir product sector look euro area product sector level find immedi evid spillov effect nonhightech ict produc sector see tabl first perform tradit nonhightech manufactur industri deterior signific respons labour product slowdown euro area second perform nonhightech servic remain weak contribut relat term sizeabl tradit manufactur industri howev come littl consol absolut term labour product growth servic industri remain subdu compar develop us saw larg acceler product especi industri period overal may various forc under slowdown claim present provid fulli comprehens pictur pattern slowdown euro area nevertheless conclud compar industrialis economi one major reason lie failur major euro area countri take full advantag new technolog least lag adjust situat might europ less abl particip product pickup doom follow continu slowdown perform european countri trace back exist polici market rigid polici chang last decad impact polici reform part visibl structur reform identifi lisbon agenda still potenti increas labour product growth therefor longterm growth potenti european economi major structur reform obvious easi achiev requir high degre nation ownership commit reform object agre lisbon process initi entrepreneur often essenti certain germani put reform propos agenda keep pressur get implement role play research develop educ key innov promot r d invest includ better use public procur innovationfriend regul step provis target fiscal incent privat sector finland current countri euro area compli lisbon target spend r d adequ system support r d cours quantit issu increas effici research time essenti high educ labour forc foster prospect innov facilit adopt new technolog abroad view healthi econom environ consist wellfunct product market mean environ competit forc reduc price margin therefor entrepreneur strong incent alloc resourc effici way addit channel competit impact labour product via enhanc innov competit pressur strong incent innov gain advantag rival numer econom studi document posit link competit innov background said remov barrier competit polici prioriti european commiss step taken fruit alreadi visibl exampl recent reform implement telecommun sector show high level labour product growth see tabl also reassur know euro area countri pass competit law compar depth best legal framework avail major oecd countri except agricultur product countri score equal well reduc trade restrict impos excess restrict foreign direct invest howev remain done regard pursuit effect competit energi market implement servic direct increas competit cours also mean innov need appropri protect incent invest innov would complet vanish reward fulli share competitor due spillov effect right associ invest left unprotect law protect properti right strict intern enforc law remain indispens competit welldevelop financi system also key enhanc growth prospect modern financi system boost econom effici channel resourc profit activ process european financi integr gradual take place consider progress made instanc capit market wholesal bank howev retail bank sector appear reach potenti yet competit seem insuffici area leav european consum small mediums enterpris unabl take full advantag benefit emu singl market inflex labour market also blame labour product slowdown euro area labour market rigid discourag effect realloc labour exampl argu american worker tend invest general human capit european worker favour specif human capit invest may part link fact worker us littl unemploy protect low unemploy benefit score employ protect legisl may particular strong negat impact industri subject rapid technolog chang sinc may preclud effici match worker job view new job requir unfortun progress increas contractu flexibl particular perman worker disappoint slow sever euro area countri labour market flexibl issu product growth flexibl labour market term wage employ adjust benefit firm worker contractu flexibl essenti world technolog chang globalis talk minut worker longer count job secur enhanc opportun get new posit lead higher employ secur educ train system need help worker master transit job keep technolog develop flexibl labour market effici activ measur contribut shorter period unemploy could otherwis lead declin worker skill product let turn link globalis product growth essenc globalis mean increas intern econom interdepend rapid integr sever emerg economi global trade product network experienc recent decad howev also includ grow internationalis financi market capit movement phenomenon intensifi sinc mid globalis bring clear benefit economi time pose signific challeng let look benefit first trade liberalis globalis enabl economi obtain cheapest product world market may turn exert downward pressur domest price lower import price therebi increas real wealth import economi globalis impli welfar gain dampen effect consum price allow produc substitut cheaper intermedi good therebi increas profit margin improv price competit second globalis certain help stimul competit domest market increas diversifi euro area trade linkag twothird extraeuro area manufactur import came industrialis highcost countri wherea share declin around decreas distribut among tradit major euro area trade partner unit kingdom japan unit state shift toward emerg lowcost economi main account increas import china lesser extent new eu member state third import context present today globalis impact product trade capit mobil internationalis technolog r d lead realloc product process trade increas incent specialis higher product sector produc economi scale encourag innov inward outward foreign direct invest impli opportun learn adopt technolog productivityenhanc practic abroad time internationalis r d support domest innov technolog progress immigr may also help increas match effici labour market howev also true globalis present challeng order reap potenti gain globalis requir economi adjust realloc product new competit emerg market certain sector tremend increas suppli product emerg market may induc reorganis product euro area countri strengthen need occup mobil capac also absorb lowskil labour new sector restructur economi may lead least temporari decreas product would protract stickier economi less abl overhaul tradit product structur may impli countri pace reform slow may find paradox wors posit past economi uncompetit product market rigid labour market fail adjust technolog chang also vulner shock associ globalis process would like conclud say europ reform economi adapt challeng globalis technolog chang age consider progress achiev reflect signific rise employ growth challeng also rais level product growth euro area countri challeng met hard imagin europ abl achiev higher growth path keep wealth citizen monetari union effect success support growth credibl monetari polici creat stabl macroeconom environ lower financ cost number euro area countri reduct risk premia emu moreov give impetus european integr particular financi market reduct barrier competit lisbon process provid tool address challeng fulli revers previous slowdown structur reform requir firm commit govern entrepreneur worker success meet challeng still high optimist succeed tabl euro area labour product growth annual chang unless otherwis state note labour product measur valu ad total employ sourc eurostat tabl contribut labour product growthnot lp growth stand labour product growth per hour work tfp stand total factor product sourc ecb calcul use euklem data tabl euro area labour product growth contribut annual averag rate discuss see articl entitl measur inflat inflat percept euro area may issu month bulletin well box recent food price develop world market euro area septemb issu month bulletin earli report oecd point potenti consequ internet tfp expand benefit ict bring term new organis product sale see oecd new economi chang role innov inform technolog growth pari see stiroh k j ict spillov drive new economi review incom wealth seri march unfortun standard correl analysi aggreg tfp ict capit growth suffic confirm exist spillov effect factor apart possibl spillov could also explain possibl correl ict capit growth chang tfp factor mismeasur product input ii omit variabl correl ict capit iii possibl increas return scale imperfect competit primari sector contribut negat slowdown despit strong perform howev negat contribut simpli outcom realloc labour industri respons chang domest demand result complet modernis process see j templ growth effect educ social capit oecd countri oecd econom studi pp extens topic see european commiss link product market reform product direct indirect impact eu economi review evid also found griffith r r harrison h simpson link product market reform innov eu macroeconom perform dgecfin econom paper februari see exampl claessen l laeven financi sector competit financi depend growth journal european econom associ vol pp reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en