Peter Praet: Housing cycles and financial stability – the role of the policymaker,24-11-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,3247,"<p>Housing markets have certain characteristics that intrinsically link them to financial stability. House price collapses can have systemic consequences. We know this from the current crisis and we know this from past crises. This fact raises a number of important questions for policymakers. Do asset price bubbles exist? If they do, how do we identify them? Should we react in the same manner to all asset price bubbles? Should we treat housing price bubbles differently? We know the cost of not reacting to house price bubbles, but what is the cost of over reaction If we react, how do we react and who reacts? These are all important questions and one could easily devote an entire speech to each of them. Instead, I’ll try to touch lightly on all of them. This may seem like a strange question to ask in light of the recent experiences in the US, Ireland and Spain. But, there is no consensus among economists that asset price bubbles actually exist. If one takes the narrow definition of a bubble used by researchers then – in order to identify a bubble – policymakers need to prove that, given the information available at the time, investors behaved irrationally. This is an impossible task, even ex-post. Some well reputed economists have argued that all famous historical asset price bubbles - from the Dutch Tulip Mania of 1634 to 1637 to the new economy boom of the 1990s - can be explained by fundamentally justified expectations about future returns on the underlying assets. Therefore, even though the booms were large and ultimately costly they were not considered excessive or irrational and, therefore, were not bubbles. So there was no need to react? I’m not trying to argue here that asset price bubbles don’t exist, I believe they do. But while the costs of dangerous house price bubbles are clear, their identification is not. Even if one feels certain that a bubble exists, it’s impossible to prove and there will many who will say you are wrong (this time it is different).The potential risks of asset price bubbles tend to vary across asset classes. Research by the IMF has shown that housing busts are, on average, twice as costly in terms of output losses as equity price busts. This reflects the higher exposure of banks to mortgages than shares. A key conclusion of literature on historical financial crises is that they tend to have worse outcomes when banks are distressed. For example, in October 1987 stock markets around the world fell sharply, but this did not represent a threat to the banking system and so, its impact was contained. In contrast, many researchers trace the origins of the current financial crisis back to the bursting of the US house price bubble. The link between house prices, banking crises and recessions is not unique to the current situation: a number of studies examining crises in both advanced and emerging economies over time and across countries have shown that they tend to coincide with the bursting of house price bubbles. The securitisation of mortgage loans has not only tended to weaken the origination process but has tended to expose countries’ financial systems to real estate excesses in other countries. By transferring the credit risk the originator can exacerbate the boom without fear of the consequences of a collapse. So, how do policymakers identify these costly house price collapses? Most house price busts are preceded by lengthy booms, so perhaps policymakers should try to identify potentially costly booms. But, even identifying a house price boom (costly or not) in real time can be challenging due to data issues regarding house price indices. The quality of these indices can be quite poor, one country can have a variety of indices from which to choose (each providing a different measure of growth), the publication lag can be quite significant in some countries and, within the euro area, there is a lack of harmonisation across countries. Even if one identifies a boom, how do you know that it’s a costly one? Not all house price booms end in bust and not all busts are very costly in terms of output nor have implications for financial stability. A 2003 IMF study of real house price cycles for 14 countries over 30 years found that only 40 per cent of house price booms ended in bust. An examination by the OECD of 17 countries over a similar period showed that two-thirds of real house price booms ended in bust. Closer to home, a 2003 ECB study of real house price cycles in EU countries over twenty years found that busts followed 55 per cent of booms. If we examine nominal house price cycles the percentage of booms ending in bust is even lower.But, to avoid overreaction, policymakers need to be able to disentangle the pernicious housing price booms from those that are costless or low-cost. This is a difficult task, even ex-post, and one that some researchers have described as “impossible” ex-ante. However, research on house price booms and busts has identified some useful and timely indicators. Analysis has shown that house price booms fuelled by excess credit growth tend to be most costly. Following from this conclusion, research - within ECB, the BIS and the IMF – has shown that simple deviations of money and credit aggregates from a trend that exceed a given threshold are useful predicators of potentially costly boom/bust cycles in asset prices. A key feature of these indictors from a policy perspective is that they signal a warning well before the standard conjunctural analysis does. Once there is a clear indication or signal that a house price is likely to be a reflection of a potentially costly boom episode, how should policy makers react? Policy measures aimed at containing asset price bubbles can be proactive and reactive. In the presence of financially sound borrowers and/or a resilient banking sector, the impact of house price declines on the real economy should be limited. This enhances the case for a proactive approach focusing on both the quality of the borrowers and the resilience of the banks. Regarding borrower quality, it is imperative that banks ensure that mortgage holders are credit worthy and capable of withstanding income shocks. The propensity for banks to take risks can increase in a competitive market where they are trying to maintain/increase market share. It is worth noting at this point that the significant and widespread mistakes made by (sub-prime) mortgage lenders in the US when assessing the credit worthiness of borrowers were not paralleled in the euro area and that write-offs on housing loans extended by euro area banks have remained low and broadly stable this year. However, certain euro area mortgage lenders did make some serious errors in judgement and credit risk exposures arising from mortgage lending do vary significantly across euro area countries. Exposures are highest among banks operating in countries with high household indebtedness, subdued household income prospects and/or where there is potential for a decline in residential/commercial property prices and also among banks that issued loans in foreign currencies that have now appreciated. The tools available to limit the exposure of banks to borrower credit risk are well known by this audience but I’ll list a few anyway: loan-to-value thresholds, debt-to-income thresholds, caps on the monthly repayment-to-income ratio.As regards the banks resilience, the current financial crisis revealed that fragmented micro-prudential supervision was insufficient to ensure a stable banking sector. Since then some substantial changes have been made and are currently under way in financial regulation. These include a strengthening of micro-prudential oversight and, perhaps most importantly, the introduction of a complementary macro-prudential perspective. The practice of macro-prudential oversight – the bird’s eye perspective on the financial system – was not yet sufficiently established in the period before the crisis erupted. In Europe a key response to the crisis was the creation last year of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) – an independent EU body responsible for the macro-prudential oversight of the Union’s financial system. An important challenge for the ESRB in its task of monitoring systemic risks and vulnerabilities is bringing this new macro-prudential perspective to the traditional micro-prudential one. This interaction is key, as the recent financial crisis painfully illustrated that financial institutions may be sound on a stand-alone basis while the financial system as a whole can still be exposed to serious risks and vulnerabilities. In the ESRB this interaction is facilitated by the body’s composition which brings together representatives from both central banks and financial supervisory authorities from all 27 EU Member States, from the European Commission and the three European Supervisory Authorities.To prevent and mitigate systemic risks to the EU financial system, the ESRB identifies and assesses risks and vulnerabilities and may as a next step issue risk warnings and/or recommendations if deemed appropriate. Warnings and recommendations can be either public or private. They can be addressed to supervisory bodies, both national and European ones, as well as individual member states and the EU as a whole. The ESRB gives the addressee of a recommendation a timeline for its implementation, and this process is then followed-up according to a “comply or explain” mechanism. Although the ESRB has no binding power, addressees that do not follow recommendations have to provide reasons for their inaction. This mechanism, together with the “moral suasion” of a public recommendation, provides a strong incentive for the addressees to comply. Last month, the ESRB published its first public recommendations on lending in foreign currencies. Lending in foreign currencies has become common in some EU countries. Often it takes place through mortgage loans at significantly lower interest rates than similar loans in national currency and to households that are not protected against the exchange rate risk. It entails significant risks for the financial sector, including the potential for cross-border contagion. It is a practise that may also amplify booms and busts in housing markets. The ESRB’s recommendations aim to tackle the roots of the problems and thereby, improve the overall resilience of the financial sector. A lot of the ESRB’s work to date has, by necessity, focused on the challenges of the current crisis situation, but much effort has also gone into more medium term or structural issues and the development and future implementation of macro-prudential tools. Having the proper regulatory framework, the right tools and the mandate to use them is essential for achieving more balanced future developments, for example in credit and asset markets. The ESRB, therefore, reviews draft EU financial legislation, and provides suggestions to legislators on how to strengthen its macro-prudential dimension whilst ensuring that policy-makers have the flexibility to take necessary action. The macro-prudential policy toolkit is currently in the process of being built. The potential instruments are various and many are already assigned to other policy objectives, most notably short-term interest rates, capital ratios and tools for ensuring the soundness of individual banks. Few of these instruments have been used for macro-prudential purposes; therefore, practical experience is limited. The choice of instrument will largely depend on the policy goal. If the aim is to constrain excessive credit growth, then tools that impact the cost and quantity of credit are the most likely choice. Given the key role of interest rates in achieving the ECB’s price stability objective, capital or leverage requirements, and/or liquidity requirements may be the most appropriate tools. If the objective is to curb borrower indebtedness, then the aforementioned tools are also useful, as are other measures including increasing collateral requirements (e.g. LTV ratios), changing the tax treatment of mortgage interest and capital controls (but risk of long-term distortions). If the goal is to reduce banks’ exposure to asset price cycles then counter cyclical capital buffers are useful as well as tools of a more micro-prudential nature. In addition to the establishment the ESRB, several steps have been taken both at the international and at the European level to improve the regulatory framework, by introducing financial regulations that directly or indirectly address systemic risks. These include the new Basel capital and liquidity requirements published in December 2010.While the higher minimum capital requirements are aimed at strengthening micro-prudential supervision, they will be complemented by the introduction of counter cyclical capital buffers from 2016 onwards. The objective of countercyclical buffers is to ensure banks build up capital buffers in good times, so that capital is available to absorb increased losses in downturns. This tool is largely macro-prudential and should help mitigate excessive credit growth and avoid the build up of excessive risks – not just in mortgage markets - but in the financial system as a whole. Although the trigger for activating the counter-cyclical capital buffer is defined as the excessive deviation of private sector credit growth from its long term trend, authorities may use complementary sources of information in buffer settings, including more granular data on house prices and mortgage loans. The new liquidity rules of Basel III should also mitigate excessive credit growth. In particular, the so called net stable funding ratio, which aims to reduce the maturity mismatch by requiring banks to finance their long term loans with long term funds. The Basel III framework, represents a minimum standard, and therefore, authorities can introduce more stringent prudential rules to address specific risks in their domestic banking systems, for example higher risk weights for certain exposure classes. For example, the proposed Capital Requirements Regulation (Art. 119), which will be directly applicable across all European countries, offers a leeway for national authorities to increase risk weights or set stricter criteria (e.g. for loan-to-value ratios) for exposures secured on residential or commercial real estate on the grounds of financial stability.The financial crisis has intensified the debate as to whether monetary policy should be actively used to contain asset price booms and bubbles. This is the idea that central banks should “lean against the wind” of a sustained and swift upward movement in asset prices. In general, the view on “leaning against the wind” in the central bank community seems to have shifted more in its favour since the outbreak of the crisis. In the past, there were some very vocal critics of “leaning against the wind” whose arguments included the following: Monetary policy is too blunt a tool to contain bubbles. Increasing the main refinancing rate has implications not just for mortgage rates but also rates on loans given to other sectors of the economy and other potentially non-booming asset prices.“Leaning against the wind” is a very complex tool to use in a currency union such as the euro area where one can experience diverging trends in house and other asset prices across countriesFinally, as I have mentioned, asset price booms are not always costly and it’s difficult to identify those that are in real time.Since the outbreak of the financial crises, more and more empirical evidence and theoretical arguments have been put forward either directly or indirectly supporting the “leaning against the wind” proposition. The arguments supporting this proposition include the following:The current and past crises highlight the potentially significantly high costs of asset price booms and bustsSimple deviation indicators help with the early detection of potentially costly house price booms/busts. (Deviation from long term trends in credit-to-GDP ratio is a trigger for the activation of the counter-cyclical capital buffer. Data on house prices and mortgage loans may also be used by authorities as complementary source of information in buffer settings.)There is increasing evidence that banks’ attitude to risk are correlated with the monetary policy stance (risk taking channel)Small increase in rates might break herding behaviour of private investors.The debate is ongoing. Regarding the ECB’s stance, some elements of “leaning against the wind” are implicitly incorporated in the monetary policy strategy through the second pillar of monetary analysis. Having said this, it should be clear that “leaning against the wind” is only a second best instrument, to be considered once macro-prudential tools should have proven to be ineffective and only to be used in very special circumstances, e.g. in case a rise in asset prices is geographically widespread and thus threatening price stability in the monetary union in the long-run. Asset price bubbles do exist and have potentially large costs for the real economy, particularly in the case of house price bubbles. Although their costs are clear their identification is not. The ex-ante detection of costly house price booms is extremely difficult and cannot be done with complete certainty. In addition, identification problems are amplified by data issues regarding house price indices. However, a number of useful predicators of potentially costly boom/bust cycles have been identified by researchers, these include simple deviations of money and credit aggregates from a trend that exceed a given threshold. Policy makers can use both proactive and reactive measures to combat costly house price booms. Limiting credit risk exposures from borrowers and/or ensuring the resilience of banks would help limit the potential costs of house price collapses. The establishment of the ESRB – an independent body responsible for the macro-prudential oversight of the EU financial system – along with the new capital and liquidity measures for banks marks a big step in the right direction. However, the macroprudential policy toolkit is currently in the build-up phase. The current set of instruments is varied and many are already assigned to other policy objectives. The instruments policy makers use will largely depend on the objective they want to achieve. The use of macro-prudential instruments requires a balancing act: on the one hand containing developments judged to contain financial stability risks and on the other hand ensuring that economic growth and financial development is not unnecessarily constrained by an overreaction. As regards the monitoring of asset price cycles and mitigating the risk of credit-fuelled booms, the newly formed ESRB, which brings together central bankers, financial supervisors (both national and European) and the European Commission, is best placed to provide warnings and recommendations to policymakers. We will never be able to create a “bubble free” world but, with better support from macro-prudential policy, we can significantly reduce the probability of costly booms. Alessi, L. and C. Detken, “Quasi real time early warning indicators for costly asset price boom/bust cycles: A role for global liquidity”, European Journal of Political Economy, 27(3), 520-533, Sept. 2011.Allen, F. and K. Rogoff (2011), Asset Prices, Financial Stability and Monetary Policy, paper presented at Swedish Riksbank Workshop on Housing Markets Monetary Policy and Financial Stability (subsequently updated), February.Clark, A. and A. Large (2011), Macroprudential Policy: Addressing the Things We Don’t Know, Occasional Paper Series, No. 83, Group of Thirty, Washington.Drudi, F. et al. (2009), Housing Finance in the euro area, Occasional Paper Series , No. 101, European Central Bank, MarchECB (2003), Structural Factors in the EU Housing Markets, European Central Bank.Garber, P. (2000), Famous first bubbles: the fundamentals of early manias, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.Girouard, N., M. Kennedy, P. van den Noord and C. Andre´, (2006), Recent house price developments: The role of fundamentals, OECD Working Paper, No. 475, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.IMF (2004), “When Bubbles Burst”, World Economic Outlook, 61-84, International Monetary Fund, April.Pastor, L. and P. Veronesi (2004), Was there a NASDAQ bubble in the late 1990s?, Working Paper, University of Chicago.Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff, Banking Crises: An Equal Opportunity Menace, Working Paper Series , No. 14587, National Bureau of Economic Research, December.[1]I would like to thank Nicola Doyle, Petra Lennartsdotter and Balázs Zsámboki for their contribution to the preparation of this keynote speech.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",hous market certain characterist intrins link financi stabil hous price collaps system consequ know current crisi know past crise fact rais number import question policymak asset price bubbl exist identifi react manner asset price bubbl treat hous price bubbl differ know cost react hous price bubbl cost reaction react react react import question one could easili devot entir speech instead ll tri touch light may seem like strang question ask light recent experi us ireland spain consensus among economist asset price bubbl actual exist one take narrow definit bubbl use research order identifi bubbl policymak need prove given inform avail time investor behav irrate imposs task even expost well reput economist argu famous histor asset price bubbl dutch tulip mania new economi boom explain fundament justifi expect futur return under asset therefor even though boom larg ultim cost consid excess irrat therefor bubbl need react m tri argu asset price bubbl exist believ cost danger hous price bubbl clear identif even one feel certain bubbl exist imposs prove mani say wrong time differ potenti risk asset price bubbl tend vari across asset class research imf shown hous bust averag twice cost term output loss equiti price bust reflect higher exposur bank mortgag share key conclus literatur histor financi crise tend wors outcom bank distress exampl octob stock market around world fell sharpli repres threat bank system impact contain contrast mani research trace origin current financi crisi back burst us hous price bubbl link hous price bank crise recess uniqu current situat number studi examin crise advanc emerg economi time across countri shown tend coincid burst hous price bubbl securitis mortgag loan tend weaken origin process tend expos countri financi system real estat excess countri transfer credit risk origin exacerb boom without fear consequ collaps policymak identifi cost hous price collaps hous price bust preced lengthi boom perhap policymak tri identifi potenti cost boom even identifi hous price boom cost real time challeng due data issu regard hous price indic qualiti indic quit poor one countri varieti indic choos provid differ measur growth public lag quit signific countri within euro area lack harmonis across countri even one identifi boom know cost one hous price boom end bust bust cost term output implic financi stabil imf studi real hous price cycl countri year found per cent hous price boom end bust examin oecd countri similar period show twothird real hous price boom end bust closer home ecb studi real hous price cycl eu countri twenti year found bust follow per cent boom examin nomin hous price cycl percentag boom end bust even lower avoid overreact policymak need abl disentangl pernici hous price boom costless lowcost difficult task even expost one research describ imposs exant howev research hous price boom bust identifi use time indic analysi shown hous price boom fuell excess credit growth tend cost follow conclus research within ecb bis imf shown simpl deviat money credit aggreg trend exceed given threshold use predic potenti cost boombust cycl asset price key featur indictor polici perspect signal warn well standard conjunctur analysi clear indic signal hous price like reflect potenti cost boom episod polici maker react polici measur aim contain asset price bubbl proactiv reactiv presenc financi sound borrow andor resili bank sector impact hous price declin real economi limit enhanc case proactiv approach focus qualiti borrow resili bank regard borrow qualiti imper bank ensur mortgag holder credit worthi capabl withstand incom shock propens bank take risk increas competit market tri maintainincreas market share worth note point signific widespread mistak made subprim mortgag lender us assess credit worthi borrow parallel euro area writeoff hous loan extend euro area bank remain low broad stabl year howev certain euro area mortgag lender make serious error judgement credit risk exposur aris mortgag lend vari signific across euro area countri exposur highest among bank oper countri high household indebted subdu household incom prospect andor potenti declin residentialcommerci properti price also among bank issu loan foreign currenc appreci tool avail limit exposur bank borrow credit risk well known audienc ll list anyway loantovalu threshold debttoincom threshold cap month repaymenttoincom ratio regard bank resili current financi crisi reveal fragment microprudenti supervis insuffici ensur stabl bank sector sinc substanti chang made current way financi regul includ strengthen microprudenti oversight perhap import introduct complementari macroprudenti perspect practic macroprudenti oversight bird eye perspect financi system yet suffici establish period crisi erupt europ key respons crisi creation last year european system risk board esrb independ eu bodi respons macroprudenti oversight union financi system import challeng esrb task monitor system risk vulner bring new macroprudenti perspect tradit microprudenti one interact key recent financi crisi pain illustr financi institut may sound standalon basi financi system whole still expos serious risk vulner esrb interact facilit bodi composit bring togeth repres central bank financi supervisori author eu member state european commiss three european supervisori author prevent mitig system risk eu financi system esrb identifi assess risk vulner may next step issu risk warn andor recommend deem appropri warn recommend either public privat address supervisori bodi nation european one well individu member state eu whole esrb give addresse recommend timelin implement process followedup accord compli explain mechan although esrb bind power addresse follow recommend provid reason inact mechan togeth moral suasion public recommend provid strong incent addresse compli last month esrb publish first public recommend lend foreign currenc lend foreign currenc becom common eu countri often take place mortgag loan signific lower interest rate similar loan nation currenc household protect exchang rate risk entail signific risk financi sector includ potenti crossbord contagion practis may also amplifi boom bust hous market esrb recommend aim tackl root problem therebi improv overal resili financi sector lot esrb work date necess focus challeng current crisi situat much effort also gone medium term structur issu develop futur implement macroprudenti tool proper regulatori framework right tool mandat use essenti achiev balanc futur develop exampl credit asset market esrb therefor review draft eu financi legisl provid suggest legisl strengthen macroprudenti dimens whilst ensur policymak flexibl take necessari action macroprudenti polici toolkit current process built potenti instrument various mani alreadi assign polici object notabl shortterm interest rate capit ratio tool ensur sound individu bank instrument use macroprudenti purpos therefor practic experi limit choic instrument larg depend polici goal aim constrain excess credit growth tool impact cost quantiti credit like choic given key role interest rate achiev ecb price stabil object capit leverag requir andor liquid requir may appropri tool object curb borrow indebted aforement tool also use measur includ increas collater requir e g ltv ratio chang tax treatment mortgag interest capit control risk longterm distort goal reduc bank exposur asset price cycl counter cyclic capit buffer use well tool microprudenti natur addit establish esrb sever step taken intern european level improv regulatori framework introduc financi regul direct indirect address system risk includ new basel capit liquid requir publish decemb higher minimum capit requir aim strengthen microprudenti supervis complement introduct counter cyclic capit buffer onward object countercycl buffer ensur bank build capit buffer good time capit avail absorb increas loss downturn tool larg macroprudenti help mitig excess credit growth avoid build excess risk mortgag market financi system whole although trigger activ countercycl capit buffer defin excess deviat privat sector credit growth long term trend author may use complementari sourc inform buffer set includ granular data hous price mortgag loan new liquid rule basel iii also mitig excess credit growth particular call net stabl fund ratio aim reduc matur mismatch requir bank financ long term loan long term fund basel iii framework repres minimum standard therefor author introduc stringent prudenti rule address specif risk domest bank system exampl higher risk weight certain exposur class exampl propos capit requir regul art direct applic across european countri offer leeway nation author increas risk weight set stricter criteria e g loantovalu ratio exposur secur residenti commerci real estat ground financi stabil financi crisi intensifi debat whether monetari polici activ use contain asset price boom bubbl idea central bank lean wind sustain swift upward movement asset price general view lean wind central bank communiti seem shift favour sinc outbreak crisi past vocal critic lean wind whose argument includ follow monetari polici blunt tool contain bubbl increas main refinanc rate implic mortgag rate also rate loan given sector economi potenti nonboom asset price lean wind complex tool use currenc union euro area one experi diverg trend hous asset price across countriesfin mention asset price boom alway cost difficult identifi real time sinc outbreak financi crise empir evid theoret argument put forward either direct indirect support lean wind proposit argument support proposit includ follow current past crise highlight potenti signific high cost asset price boom bustssimpl deviat indic help earli detect potenti cost hous price boomsbust deviat long term trend credittogdp ratio trigger activ countercycl capit buffer data hous price mortgag loan may also use author complementari sourc inform buffer set increas evid bank attitud risk correl monetari polici stanc risk take channel small increas rate might break herd behaviour privat investor debat ongo regard ecb stanc element lean wind implicit incorpor monetari polici strategi second pillar monetari analysi said clear lean wind second best instrument consid macroprudenti tool proven ineffect use special circumst e g case rise asset price geograph widespread thus threaten price stabil monetari union longrun asset price bubbl exist potenti larg cost real economi particular case hous price bubbl although cost clear identif exant detect cost hous price boom extrem difficult cannot done complet certainti addit identif problem amplifi data issu regard hous price indic howev number use predic potenti cost boombust cycl identifi research includ simpl deviat money credit aggreg trend exceed given threshold polici maker use proactiv reactiv measur combat cost hous price boom limit credit risk exposur borrow andor ensur resili bank would help limit potenti cost hous price collaps establish esrb independ bodi respons macroprudenti oversight eu financi system along new capit liquid measur bank mark big step right direct howev macroprudenti polici toolkit current buildup phase current set instrument vari mani alreadi assign polici object instrument polici maker use larg depend object want achiev use macroprudenti instrument requir balanc act one hand contain develop judg contain financi stabil risk hand ensur econom growth financi develop unnecessarili constrain overreact regard monitor asset price cycl mitig risk creditfuel boom newli form esrb bring togeth central banker financi supervisor nation european european commiss best place provid warn recommend policymak never abl creat bubbl free world better support macroprudenti polici signific reduc probabl cost boom alessi l c detken quasi real time earli warn indic cost asset price boombust cycl role global liquid european journal polit economi sept allen f k rogoff asset price financi stabil monetari polici paper present swedish riksbank workshop hous market monetari polici financi stabil subsequ updat februari larg macroprudenti polici address thing know occasion paper seri group thirti washington drudi f et al hous financ euro area occasion paper seri european central bank marchecb structur factor eu hous market european central bank garber p famous first bubbl fundament earli mania massachusett institut technolog girouard n m kennedi p van den noord c andr recent hous price develop role fundament oecd work paper organis econom cooper develop imf bubbl burst world econom outlook intern monetari fund april pastor l p veronesi nasdaq bubbl late work paper univers chicago reinhart c k rogoff bank crise equal opportun menac work paper seri nation bureau econom research decemb would like thank doyl petra lennartsdott baláz zsámboki contribut prepar keynot speech reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en