"Benoît Cœuré: SME financing, market innovation and regulation",11-04-2013,European Central Bank,ECB,3284,"<p>Small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) are special. They are the backbone of the euro area economy: they constitute about 98% of all euro area firms, it employs around three-quarters of the euro area’s employees, and they generate around 60% of value added. [2] These figures happen to be even higher in those jurisdictions which have been most affected by the crisis. SMEs are also specific in their financing structure. They turn more often to banks for their external financing than large firms but, at the same time, they are generally more likely to experience greater difficulties in obtaining funds. There are structural reasons for this, notably they are more opaque and their corporate capabilities more difficult to assess, because their financial statements are less informative and their credit histories are usually shorter. These characteristics are compounded by fixed costs in external assessment and monitoring. All this leads to higher transaction costs, especially those stemming from asymmetric information, for SMEs. It is therefore to some extent inevitable that credit sources for small firms tend to dry up more rapidly than for large companies during economic downturns, thereby disrupting the business and investment activities of these firms to a greater extent. [3] And this has indeed been the case during the crisis in the euro area. The creditworthiness and financial health of SMEs have deteriorated more sharply than those of large firms, and the protracted period of weak economic conditions has exacerbated the asymmetric information challenges of SMEs. The statistics currently available do not provide timely and high-frequency hard data on the balance sheet position of a representative set of SMEs for the euro area. Yet, based on survey information provided by the ECB (the Survey on Access to Finance of Enterprises, SAFE), we see that SMEs’ profits, liquidity buffers and own capital have developed less favourably than have those of large firms during the crisis [4] (Charts 1 and 2). From the viewpoint of commercial banks’ risk management, it may thus be partly understandable that banks take a more selective approach in supplying loans in a recession in order to preserve the quality of the asset side of the balance sheets. But, in general, such credit tightening currently appears to be very severe for SMEs, because they are perceived by banks to have a higher probability of default than larger firms, and because SMEs are often unable to switch from bank credit to other sources of external finance.As a result, SMEs are more likely to be affected by excessive bank risk aversion and thus by outright rationing of credit provision than are large firms. Difficulties in borrowing, which influence not only their day-to-day activities, but also their ability to grow, may then easily transform liquidity constraints into solvency risk.To illustrate this point, two facts are worth mentioning. First, SMEs tend to face higher costs for bank finance. A simple comparison between small loans (typically to SMEs) and very large loans (typically to large corporations) shows that euro area SMEs were paying on average around 160 basis points more than large euro area companies in the six months up to January 2013. [5] There is also a substantial divergence across euro area countries which has worsened since the beginning of the financial crisis (Chart 3). For instance, in the same period, the spread was around 50 basis points for SMEs in Austria and Belgium, but 261 in Spain and 174 in Ireland. Just to put this in a “historical” perspective: between 2003 and 2008 the same spread was 84 basis points in the euro area, 79 basis points in Spain and 44 basis points in Ireland.The second fact that is worth mentioning is the higher rejection rates of loan applications of SMEs, as the ECB survey shows (Chart 4). SMEs are systematically reporting that they face more financing obstacles than large firms across major euro countries (except here in Ireland, where firms are reporting to be highly constrained irrespective of their size). This appears, at least in part, to be related to their financial position. Indeed, when linking information on the financial health of SMEs with the actual financing obstacles they experience, it turns out that firms in countries with higher leverage and interest payment burdens as well as lower profits tend to be more affected by financing obstacles than SMEs in other euro area countries (Chart 5).However, it is worth noting that in conjunction with credit constraints, several other issues have an impact on the environment in which SMEs operate. For instance, they are more affected by downward trends in the economy and structural rigidities, i.e. a lack of demand for their products, high input prices, unfavourable regulation, heavy administrative burdens, inflexible labour and product markets, etc. Since such factors differ across countries, the financing costs of SMEs will inevitably also vary across the euro area. Obviously, the Eurosystem cannot influence these factors.In periods of binding bank lending constraints, a mitigating factor is the ability of corporates to replace bank credit with alternative sources of financing. Since the outbreak of the financial crisis, internal financing and external financing instruments other than bank loans in general have increased in importance relative to bank loans. Depending on the financing environment, substitution effects have differed markedly across euro area countries (Chart 6). On the one hand, enterprises have replaced bank loans with market-based financing or financing via unquoted equity during the crisis. In this respect, the relevance of debt securities has increased, especially in some countries, such as France. On the other hand, inter-company loans have gained importance in other countries, such as Germany. In the same period, trade credit appears to have taken on a buffer role in some euro area countries.We know, however, that some of these substitution activities have mainly affected larger companies, as in the case of debt securities, while trade credit, leasing and factoring are closer substitutes to loans for SMEs (Chart 7). But trade credit, leasing and factoring are strictly related to the business activity of companies and in recessions their buffer role might be limited by the reduction in the exchange of goods and services.Taking a macroeconomic perspective, credit supply conditions have certainly been found to have an impact on real economic activity during the crisis. Analyses carried out by ECB staff [6] suggest a rather limited contribution of credit supply conditions to euro area economic activity between 2007 and the first quarter of 2008. By the fourth quarter of 2008, however, the impact of credit supply conditions appears sizeable. At the peak of the crisis, namely in the first half of 2009, model-based analysis points to credit supply effects accounting for an almost 2- percentage-point contraction in annual real GDP growth, namely around one-third of the overall contraction. As the sovereign debt crisis unfolded, credit supply factors turned detrimental to growth again. In this context, riskier borrowing segments are highly vulnerable to the self-reinforcing dynamics of weak economic conditions, low financial buffers and tight bank lending policies. Actually, the Eurosystem Bank Lending Survey shows over the recent quarters that both healthy and stressed banks report risk perceptions as their main concern and significantly tighten margins on riskier borrowers.During the crisis, the ECB took exceptional monetary policy actions, distinguishing between standard and non-standard measures. Standard measures have included the reduction of all key interest rates. Non-conventional measures have comprised fixed-rate full allotment mode in refinancing operations, the lengthening of the maturity of such refinancing operations up to 36 months, the extension of the list of eligible collateral (see Chart 8), the liquidity provision directly in foreign currencies, the reduction in the reserve requirements from 2% to 1%, the covered bond purchase programmes, the securities market programme, and, finally, the announcement of the outright monetary transactions. Such actions have proved to be effective in alleviating bank funding constraints, containing the risks of a disorderly bank deleveraging process, and supporting the effective transmission of interest rates across the euro area, amid a dysfunctional financial market. These measures were exceptional in nature, scope and magnitude, and yet appropriate for the severity of the circumstances. These interventions have served to considerably ease the downside pressures to price stability by avoiding an abrupt credit crunch stemming from sudden shortages of liquidity and funding for banks. However, at times, the effectiveness of monetary policy itself has been hindered by financial fragmentation, in particular against the backdrop of a sovereign debt crisis in some euro area jurisdictions. As a result, the accommodative monetary policy stance set by the Governing Council has affected firms rather unevenly. The ECB will provide ample liquidity as long as needed, but market participants have to continue their efforts to facilitate the transition to a less central-bank reliant, more market-based financial system.Against this background, attention has turned to the role of public policies in reducing impediments and unclogging credit channels towards SMEs. As a first measure, most governments have expanded credit guarantees to SMEs for the purpose of inducing banks to reopen their lending facilities, thereby reducing the risk that banks need to take on their balance sheets when granting new loans. Other measures have tended to stimulate the chronic shortage of supply of capital into new seed, start-up and early-stage firms. Venture capital (VC) funds have been channelled through public/private co-investment VC funds managed by private sector fund managers. Innovative instruments have included the promotion of investment in SME equity to cope with the undercapitalisation problem. Some of these measures have a longer-term structural perspective, rather than something that can address the immediate conjunctural weakness of SMEs. Overall, loan schemes, especially guarantees, tend to have a much larger impact in terms of the number of firms affected, while venture capital and similar schemes are much more targeted and restricted to specific groups of firms. However, they have proved to be of limited effectiveness in stressed countries, given the higher funding costs faced by stressed sovereigns themselves. In terms of impact, while governments have strengthened their support measures for SMEs during the financial crisis, it seems that SMEs in most countries have not yet seen a visible improvement, at least based on evidence from survey results (Chart 9). Apparently, while a range of government support measures exists for alleviating SMEs’ access to finance, it has proved difficult to reach the policy targets, i.e. the SMEs.Beyond government financing instruments to support SMEs’ access to finance, other policy actions may be considered. This includes the development of deeper capital markets accessible also for SMEs and a wider use of ratings for SMEs. In addition, combating payment delays in trade credit financing helps to alleviate liquidity constraints and has already been put in place in some countries. Besides governments, supranational institutions also offer support measures to SMEs – measures which could be enhanced. Traditional instruments of intervention are related to the European Investment Bank (EIB) lending to SMEs [7] and the European Investment Fund’s (EIF) actions in the ABS market designed to revive investors’ interest and confidence, by facilitating large and liquid transactions. An interesting pilot project on trade finance was launched by the EIB in December 2012 for Greece. For the first time, the EIB is involved in a short-term credit support instrument.In addition to direct support measures by national governments as well as by European and international institutions, the regulatory framework may also have an impact on the incentives of banks regarding their exposures to SMEs. Let me note in this context that the European Banking Authority (EBA) has recently published a detailed analysis of the estimated impact of banking solvency regulation on SME lending, with a particular focus on the relevant provisions of the forthcoming capital requirements legislation in the EU. [8] In this regard, a clear distinction should be made between micro- and macro-prudential policy objectives and tools that may have relevance for supporting SME lending.From a micro-prudential perspective, minimum capital requirements and the underlying risk weights can be considered as the main factors potentially affecting banks’ incentives to lend to SMEs. In the current regulatory framework, there are different provisions affecting SMEs, depending on whether a standardised approach or more sophisticated approaches are used. As regards the standardised approach, loan size plays an important role when defining the risk weight and thus the pertinent capital requirement. To clarify: small-sized loans up to €1 million are treated as retail exposures, and benefit from a lower risk weight of 75%, compared with a risk weight of 100% for unrated corporate loans. Hence, the current regulation treats small-sized loans, which are likely to be taken up mainly by SMEs, in a more favourable manner.However, for larger (over €1 million) loans there is no favourable treatment for SMEs under the standardised approach. For unrated loans exceeding €1 million, the treatment of exposures to SMEs and large companies is the same. Only companies with good credit ratings – which are typically larger corporates – benefit from lower risk weights.Importantly, for banks using the more sophisticated approaches for credit risk, namely the advanced internal ratings-based (IRB) approaches, the current regulatory framework further provides for preferential treatment of SME loans vis-à-vis large corporate exposures. The Capital Requirements Regulation and Directive, or CRD IV, entails a significant increase in the quality and quantity of capital. While the phasing-in is rather long and expected to end in 2019, the implementation of various capital buffers and the higher level of minimum capital requirements – though clearly beneficial for enhancing financial stability in the long term – are estimated to increase the overall cost of funds. This is likely to be reflected in the interest rates charged to all clients, including SMEs.Aware of the potential implications for SMEs and with the aim of partly neutralising the potential adverse impact of increased minimum capital requirements, EU co-legislators have agreed on the inclusion of a specific discount factor for exposures to SMEs, for loans up to €1.5 million. This measure is expected to reduce capital requirements for SMEs by about 25% [9]. The ECB supports this proposal and considers it as an important policy tool that may help SMEs in their access to bank finance. Taking a long-term perspective, together with micro-prudential considerations, the CRD IV will also provide a harmonised legal framework for a range of macro-prudential tools. In this regard, the first policy tool that is explicitly designed to address systemic risk is the counter-cyclical capital buffer, which will be phased in gradually from 2016 onwards. While the primary objective of this buffer is to enhance the resilience of banks by building up buffers in periods of excessive credit growth that can be released when the system as a whole is in distress, a positive side effect of the application of the measure is that it may contribute to smoothing the credit cycle, thus providing funds for corporate clients, including SMEs, also in recessions. This however also implies that as long as we do not have sufficient capital buffers that could be released to absorb losses or to loosen prudential measures regulated by EU law, the use of macro-prudential tools to support SME lending is very limited.Finally, in a broader context, there is a need for structural market innovation to improve SME financing. Such an innovation would create a market for asset-backed securities, where the underlying assets are loans to SMEs. It could also support the revival of this market segment by increasing its transparency and therefore investor confidence. Having access to a diversified source of finance for SMEs will enhance their resilience through the business cycle. Because SMEs are characterised by their relatively small size and because it is costly to collect information on their projects, they have limited access to capital markets. In this context, securitisation offers an opportunity for the custodians of large pools of European savings, i.e. insurance and pension funds, to channel resources to SMEs. In this vein, the efforts put in place in the Prime Collateralised Securities (PCS) initiative should be commanded. The PCS has defined common criteria on standardisation, quality, simplicity, and transparency with the aim to improve market depth and liquidity for the ABSs. It also includes specific criteria on SME ABS.Prudential reforms could also help to revive securitisation activity. A key initiative in this field is the so called Solvency II Directive for the insurance sector, which aims to align capital requirements with risks that insurance companies have actually taken in their investing activities. In the current proposal for Solvency II, which will probably come into force on 1 January 2016 with a 10-year phase-in period, the capital requirements for certain securitised products will increase significantly, thus potentially reducing insurers’ willingness to allocate funds to such asset classes. The appropriateness of the capital charges in Solvency II and their consistency with the capital requirement rules under the CRD IV are currently being reviewed by EIOPA. In this regard, particular attention needs to be paid to providing a level playing field for banks and insurers as well as to enhancing long-term financing of the real economy through the securitisation of debt.In the nearer term, how can the impediments to bank funding of SMEs be addressed? In essence, these impediments are of three types: the banks’ own funding conditions, their perception of the credit risk of their clients, and lack of capital. The ECB does not have a magic wand. The central bank cannot compensate for a shortage, or a misallocation of equity. That is something that has to be addressed, in one form or the other, by other stakeholders. Neither can the central bank alter the credit risk of individual borrowers, although governments can have an impact here through reforms that improve the operating environment of those firms – labour and product market regulation for instance. Where the central bank has a direct role, within its mandate, is primarily with respect to bank funding conditions. Indeed, the ECB has taken and will continue to take appropriate measures to ensure that bank funding is not a source of financial fragmentation or an impediment to bank lending. It is reasonable to think that simultaneous action on all three counts, by the relevant stakeholders in each case, would be mutually reinforcing.[1]I wish to thank Annalisa Ferrando, Petra Köhler-Ulbrich and Balázs Zsámboki for their inputs. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.[2]See “EU SMEs in 2012: at the crossroads. Annual Report on SMEs in the EU 2011/2012”, EC DG-Enterprise.[3]See Fazzari, S., G. Hubbard and B. Petersen (1988), “Financing Constraints and Corporate Investment”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 141-195 and Duchin, R., O. Ozbas and B. A. Sensoy, “Costly external finance, corporate investment, and the subprime mortgage credit crisis”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 97, Issue 3, (2010), pp. 418-435.[4]Qualitative information on SME access to finance is extracted from the ECB’s biannual survey on access to finance of SMEs in the euro area (SAFE). See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/money/surveys/sme/html/index.en.html.[5]The spread refers to the difference in the rates on small-sized new business loans (up to €1 million) and large new business loans (over €1 million). Euro area rates are weighted averages, based on new business volumes, of national rates.[6]For a detailed description of a model-based methodology of this type, see Box 2 “Analysis of the impact of credit supply factors on economic activity using structural models”, Monthly Bulletin Article, January 2011, European Central Bank. See also ECB Structural Issues Report 2013, “Corporate finance and economic activity in the euro area”, forthcoming.[7]In 2012, more than 200000 SMEs received EIB Group support, compared to 120000 in 2011. EIB signed loans for SMEs and mid-caps in 2012 amount to €12.1 bn and disbursements to €9.8 bn. EIF committed 1.4 bn of new venture capital in 63 new funds leveraging over €7 bn.[8]See European Banking Authority (EBA), “Assessment of SME proposals for CRD IV/CRR”, September 2012.[9]See Article 476a, Para (1), of the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR): “Capital requirements for credit risk on exposures to small and medium sized enterprises shall be multiplied by the factor 0.7619.”Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",small medium size enterpris smes special backbon euro area economi constitut euro area firm employ around threequart euro area employe generat around valu ad figur happen even higher jurisdict affect crisi smes also specif financ structur turn often bank extern financ larg firm time general like experi greater difficulti obtain fund structur reason notabl opaqu corpor capabl difficult assess financi statement less inform credit histori usual shorter characterist compound fix cost extern assess monitor lead higher transact cost especi stem asymmetr inform smes therefor extent inevit credit sourc small firm tend dri rapid larg compani econom downturn therebi disrupt busi invest activ firm greater extent inde case crisi euro area creditworthi financi health smes deterior sharpli larg firm protract period weak econom condit exacerb asymmetr inform challeng smes statist current avail provid time highfrequ hard data balanc sheet posit repres set smes euro area yet base survey inform provid ecb survey access financ enterpris safe see smes profit liquid buffer capit develop less favour larg firm crisi chart viewpoint commerci bank risk manag may thus part understand bank take select approach suppli loan recess order preserv qualiti asset side balanc sheet general credit tighten current appear sever smes perceiv bank higher probabl default larger firm smes often unabl switch bank credit sourc extern financ result smes like affect excess bank risk avers thus outright ration credit provis larg firm difficulti borrow influenc daytoday activ also abil grow may easili transform liquid constraint solvenc risk illustr point two fact worth mention first smes tend face higher cost bank financ simpl comparison small loan typic smes larg loan typic larg corpor show euro area smes pay averag around basi point larg euro area compani six month januari also substanti diverg across euro area countri worsen sinc begin financi crisi chart instanc period spread around basi point smes austria belgium spain ireland put histor perspect spread basi point euro area basi point spain basi point ireland second fact worth mention higher reject rate loan applic smes ecb survey show chart smes systemat report face financ obstacl larg firm across major euro countri except ireland firm report high constrain irrespect size appear least part relat financi posit inde link inform financi health smes actual financ obstacl experi turn firm countri higher leverag interest payment burden well lower profit tend affect financ obstacl smes euro area countri chart howev worth note conjunct credit constraint sever issu impact environ smes oper instanc affect downward trend economi structur rigid e lack demand product high input price unfavour regul heavi administr burden inflex labour product market etc sinc factor differ across countri financ cost smes inevit also vari across euro area obvious eurosystem cannot influenc factor period bind bank lend constraint mitig factor abil corpor replac bank credit altern sourc financ sinc outbreak financi crisi intern financ extern financ instrument bank loan general increas import relat bank loan depend financ environ substitut effect differ mark across euro area countri chart one hand enterpris replac bank loan marketbas financ financ via unquot equiti crisi respect relev debt secur increas especi countri franc hand intercompani loan gain import countri germani period trade credit appear taken buffer role euro area countri know howev substitut activ main affect larger compani case debt secur trade credit leas factor closer substitut loan smes chart trade credit leas factor strict relat busi activ compani recess buffer role might limit reduct exchang good servic take macroeconom perspect credit suppli condit certain found impact real econom activ crisi analys carri ecb staff suggest rather limit contribut credit suppli condit euro area econom activ first quarter fourth quarter howev impact credit suppli condit appear sizeabl peak crisi name first half modelbas analysi point credit suppli effect account almost percentagepoint contract annual real gdp growth name around onethird overal contract sovereign debt crisi unfold credit suppli factor turn detriment growth context riskier borrow segment high vulner selfreinforc dynam weak econom condit low financi buffer tight bank lend polici actual eurosystem bank lend survey show recent quarter healthi stress bank report risk percept main concern signific tighten margin riskier borrow crisi ecb took except monetari polici action distinguish standard nonstandard measur standard measur includ reduct key interest rate nonconvent measur compris fixedr full allot mode refinanc oper lengthen matur refinanc oper month extens list elig collater see chart liquid provis direct foreign currenc reduct reserv requir cover bond purchas programm secur market programm final announc outright monetari transact action prove effect allevi bank fund constraint contain risk disord bank deleverag process support effect transmiss interest rate across euro area amid dysfunct financi market measur except natur scope magnitud yet appropri sever circumst intervent serv consider eas downsid pressur price stabil avoid abrupt credit crunch stem sudden shortag liquid fund bank howev time effect monetari polici hinder financi fragment particular backdrop sovereign debt crisi euro area jurisdict result accommod monetari polici stanc set govern council affect firm rather uneven ecb provid ampl liquid long need market particip continu effort facilit transit less centralbank reliant marketbas financi system background attent turn role public polici reduc impedi unclog credit channel toward smes first measur govern expand credit guarante smes purpos induc bank reopen lend facil therebi reduc risk bank need take balanc sheet grant new loan measur tend stimul chronic shortag suppli capit new seed startup earlystag firm ventur capit vc fund channel publicpriv coinvest vc fund manag privat sector fund manag innov instrument includ promot invest sme equiti cope undercapitalis problem measur longerterm structur perspect rather someth address immedi conjunctur weak smes overal loan scheme especi guarante tend much larger impact term number firm affect ventur capit similar scheme much target restrict specif group firm howev prove limit effect stress countri given higher fund cost face stress sovereign term impact govern strengthen support measur smes financi crisi seem smes countri yet seen visibl improv least base evid survey result chart appar rang govern support measur exist allevi smes access financ prove difficult reach polici target e smes beyond govern financ instrument support smes access financ polici action may consid includ develop deeper capit market access also smes wider use rate smes addit combat payment delay trade credit financ help allevi liquid constraint alreadi put place countri besid govern supran institut also offer support measur smes measur could enhanc tradit instrument intervent relat european invest bank eib lend smes european invest fund eif action ab market design reviv investor interest confid facilit larg liquid transact interest pilot project trade financ launch eib decemb greec first time eib involv shortterm credit support instrument addit direct support measur nation govern well european intern institut regulatori framework may also impact incent bank regard exposur smes let note context european bank author eba recent publish detail analysi estim impact bank solvenc regul sme lend particular focus relev provis forthcom capit requir legisl eu regard clear distinct made micro macroprudenti polici object tool may relev support sme lend microprudenti perspect minimum capit requir under risk weight consid main factor potenti affect bank incent lend smes current regulatori framework differ provis affect smes depend whether standardis approach sophist approach use regard standardis approach loan size play import role defin risk weight thus pertin capit requir clarifi smallsiz loan million treat retail exposur benefit lower risk weight compar risk weight unrat corpor loan henc current regul treat smallsiz loan like taken main smes favour manner howev larger million loan favour treatment smes standardis approach unrat loan exceed million treatment exposur smes larg compani compani good credit rate typic larger corpor benefit lower risk weight import bank use sophist approach credit risk name advanc intern ratingsbas irb approach current regulatori framework provid preferenti treatment sme loan visàvi larg corpor exposur capit requir regul direct crd iv entail signific increas qualiti quantiti capit phasingin rather long expect end implement various capit buffer higher level minimum capit requir though clear benefici enhanc financi stabil long term estim increas overal cost fund like reflect interest rate charg client includ smes awar potenti implic smes aim part neutralis potenti advers impact increas minimum capit requir eu colegisl agre inclus specif discount factor exposur smes loan million measur expect reduc capit requir smes ecb support propos consid import polici tool may help smes access bank financ take longterm perspect togeth microprudenti consider crd iv also provid harmonis legal framework rang macroprudenti tool regard first polici tool explicit design address system risk countercycl capit buffer phase gradual onward primari object buffer enhanc resili bank build buffer period excess credit growth releas system whole distress posit side effect applic measur may contribut smooth credit cycl thus provid fund corpor client includ smes also recess howev also impli long suffici capit buffer could releas absorb loss loosen prudenti measur regul eu law use macroprudenti tool support sme lend limit final broader context need structur market innov improv sme financ innov would creat market assetback secur under asset loan smes could also support reviv market segment increas transpar therefor investor confid access diversifi sourc financ smes enhanc resili busi cycl smes characteris relat small size cost collect inform project limit access capit market context securitis offer opportun custodian larg pool european save e insur pension fund channel resourc smes vein effort put place prime collateralis secur pcs initi command pcs defin common criteria standardis qualiti simplic transpar aim improv market depth liquid abss also includ specif criteria sme ab prudenti reform could also help reviv securitis activ key initi field call solvenc ii direct insur sector aim align capit requir risk insur compani actual taken invest activ current propos solvenc ii probabl come forc januari year phasein period capit requir certain securitis product increas signific thus potenti reduc insur willing alloc fund asset class appropri capit charg solvenc ii consist capit requir rule crd iv current review eiopa regard particular attent need paid provid level play field bank insur well enhanc longterm financ real economi securitis debt nearer term impedi bank fund smes address essenc impedi three type bank fund condit percept credit risk client lack capit ecb magic wand central bank cannot compens shortag misalloc equiti someth address one form stakehold neither central bank alter credit risk individu borrow although govern impact reform improv oper environ firm labour product market regul instanc central bank direct role within mandat primarili respect bank fund condit inde ecb taken continu take appropri measur ensur bank fund sourc financi fragment impedi bank lend reason think simultan action three count relev stakehold case would mutual reinforc wish thank annalisa ferrando petra köhlerulbrich baláz zsámboki input remain sole respons opinion contain herein see eu smes crossroad annual report smes eu ec dgenterpris see fazzari g hubbard b petersen financ constraint corpor invest brook paper econom activ duchin r o ozba b sensoy cost extern financ corpor invest subprim mortgag credit crisi journal financi econom vol issu pp qualit inform sme access financ extract ecb biannual survey access financ smes euro area safe see http www ecb europa eustatsmoneysurveyssmehtmlindex en html spread refer differ rate smallsiz new busi loan million larg new busi loan million euro area rate weight averag base new busi volum nation rate detail descript modelbas methodolog type see box analysi impact credit suppli factor econom activ use structur model month bulletin articl januari european central bank see also ecb structur issu report corpor financ econom activ euro area forthcom smes receiv eib group support compar eib sign loan smes midcap amount bn disburs bn eif commit bn new ventur capit new fund leverag bn see european bank author eba assess sme propos crd ivcrr septemb see articl para capit requir regul crr capit requir credit risk exposur small medium size enterpris shall multipli factor reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en