José Manuel González-Páramo: How will historians judge our handling of this crisis?,10-06-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,2364,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,It is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to speak today at the Bank of Spain about the Spanish financial sector.The book being presented today consists of a distinguished collection of essays providing a wealth of information on Spain’s financial sector over the last century. Not only does it summarise the key data and the main developments, but it also provides deep analyses. It will definitely become the work of reference on the history of the financial sector in this country in the 20th century. Let me then congratulate the contributors and the editors, José Luis Malo de Molina and Pablo Martín Aceña for their excellent work.Reading the book, notably the chapter by Raimundo Poveda, we can draw some interesting parallels between the current crisis and the banking crisis in the late 1970s and early 1980s. In particular, given the current circumstances, the main message I would like to emphasise today is that certain changes in the banking sector that are implemented in response to crises are essential to guarantee a strong, robust banking sector in the future. In other words, the implementation of reforms and changes in the banking sector after a banking crisis – in respect of business practices, regulation and supervision – has the potential to strengthen the foundations of the banking sector, thereby improving its ability to contribute to sustainable economic growth. Given the limited time that I have, I will focus on some key structural developments in the banking sector that have taken place over the past twenty years and that are described and analysed in several chapters of the book. In addition, I will examine how the regulations introduced by the Bank of Spain during the boom years helped to prevent and mitigate the negative effects of the crisis and, especially, how some of the reforms and structural changes that are currently being considered may substantially reduce the fragilities of the banking sector. If implemented, they will strengthen the banking system and ultimately have positive effects on financial stability and economic growth in Spain.As I see it, Spain’s banking sector has undergone two fundamental changes since 1990: banking liberalisation and financial innovation. Banking liberalisation has produced a notable increase in competition among institutions and in financial integration. For example, the cajas (savings banks) have started to compete geographically and in different business segments. The increased competition has also led, at different times during these 20 years, to strong competition for bank deposits (e.g. la “guerra del pasivo” at the end of the 80s). In general, banking competition brings very positive aspects for the real economy and to welfare, and there is no doubt that liberalisation of the banking sector in Spain has been very positive for the country. However, we should bear in mind, as some chapters of the book point out, that too much competition may significantly increase bank risk-taking and that this may have negative implications and that this may undermine financial stability. [1] The recent very intense competition for retail deposits may also be a notable example in this regard.Another important aspect of liberalisation has been the internationalisation of the banking sector, which is very well explained in the book. I would like to stress two aspects of this phenomenon: i) the foreign expansion by Spanish banks (particularly Santander and BBVA), and ii) the significant dependence on foreign liquidity (mainly through international wholesale markets), especially after the introduction of the euro. [2]Expansion abroad, when it is well executed, definitely brings benefits in terms of geographical diversification, which have become clear during the crisis, however a reliance on funding from abroad may bring some fragility if that source of liquidity dries up, as the crisis has shown. [3] In previous banking crises, banks typically suffered from runs on retail deposits, whereas nowadays these runs are wholesale-based. [4] In the light of this, the sector should aim to diversify its sources of funding liquidity.The second defining element over the past decades has been the increase in financial innovation, notably in securitisation and market funding.Securitisation can have many positive effects, e.g. by increasing the supply of bank credit to the private sector thanks to greater bank liquidity. Some crucial segments of the economy, such as small and medium-sized firms, may also significantly benefit from the development of securitisation. At the same time, recent research has shown that securitisation may lead to a lowering of banking standards and ultimately weaken financial stability. [5] Once a bank is no longer responsible for a loan that it has made, it has fewer incentives to monitor that loan. Besides, in periods of extensive securitisation, when the bank knows that new loans can be securitised – which in some countries can imply that the risk will be totally borne by investors outside the bank – the ex ante incentives for screening are notably reduced.All these important changes in the banking industry have taken place against an ostensibly benign but potential dangerous macroeconomic backdrop: the so-called Great Moderation. Indeed, the protracted period of high economic growth and low short and long-term interest rates contributed to giving the banking sector some very good years. However, that is precisely when risk builds up – and it can be excessive. [6] Moreover, we should not overlook that macro fragilities emerged during the benign macroeconomic context: for example, both the current account deficit and the share of the real estate sector activity were around 10% of GDP in 2006.All these elements contributed to a credit boom throughout the Spanish economy, particularly in the real estate sector. In this context, let me add that – crucially – the Bank of Spain reacted very well: notably by introducing a strict regulatory system for special purpose vehicles which significantly restricted regulatory capital arbitrage, and by introducing dynamic provisions, which may have reduced the very high credit supply in the good years. Without those measures the credit boom could have been even bigger. [7] Moreover, the provision buffers have been vital during the crisis as they have allowed banks to continue supporting credit availability.Some key features of the recent crisis have been, in my view, the fragility both on the liability and asset sides of banks, coupled with a densely interlinked global financial sector. Banks’ capital reserves, transparency, funding, risk management, corporate governance and both micro and, especially, macro supervision and regulation need to be adjusted.Let me start with the fragile liabilities. We have experienced since August 2007 a funding liquidity dry-up. As I said before, in the run-up to the crisis, Spanish banks were highly dependent on foreign wholesale funding. As a result, the sector as a whole ended up suffering and some of the more dependent banks have been hit very badly.But bank liquidity also depends crucially on bank capital and, hence, banks with stronger balance sheets suffer much less from a lack of liquidity. [8] The liquidity provided by the Eurosystem has been vital to minimise the liquidity shortages, but bank capital needs to be stronger so that all banks have access to private funding liquidity. Fragile assets were an important factor too, as very high volumes of credit (and risk) were granted during the good years. Some banks took more risk than others in the real estate bubble, and some banks recorded substantially lower profits and higher (realized and potential) loan losses during the current crisis. Hence, bank capital significantly decreased, especially for some groups of cajas; they, moreover, cannot easily raise capital because of their specific structure.The availability of bank capital is essential for two additional reasons:First, a bank capital crunch may lead to a credit crunch. Thus, in order to help the real economy recover, some weak banks need to be recapitalised. This is why the recent regulatory changes on capital in Spain are crucial. [9]Banking assets are however opaque, which – combined with the high leverage – make recapitalisation in private markets difficult, especially in crisis periods. [10] Therefore, to reduce these problems, high transparency is extremely important: the stress tests and Bank of Spain’s publications on key bank variables are thus indispensable. If, after these exercises to promote transparency, some small groups of banks cannot fulfil the capital requirements, restructuring may be the only solution.Banks are still too highly exposed to real estate assets in their balance sheets and so the new haircuts introduced by the Bank of Spain go in the right direction. Geographical diversification (notably the internationalisation of some banks) and better risk management are also crucial factors, I believe, in addressing the current challenges. But also the strengthening of corporate governance is of utmost importance to avoid excessive risk-taking. In other words, transparency and risk management are important, as I said, but incentives as well! In this sense, the restructuring of some groups of banks may be vital. [11]Second, looking into the future, with the crisis behind us, higher bank capital requirements will also play a positive role by reducing incentives for excessive bank risk-taking. [12] On that same subject, we should welcome the changes made to EU and global banking regulations and supervision, both micro and macro-based: for example, the Basel III package of regulations (level and quality of capital, countercyclical buffers of capital, liquidity ratio. etc) and the developments in macroprudential supervision with the establishment of the ESRB in the EU.Changes in the banking sector after the current crisis – at national, EU and global level – can make the Spanish banking sector stronger and provide a durable support for the real economy, as happened after the 1970-80 crisis. To be specific, changes in the business models and the restructuring of some banks, more and higher-quality bank capital, better risk management, improved transparency and corporate governance, as well as changes in banking regulations and supervision – all these factors will contribute towards sustainable economic growth.However, as necessary as these changes are, they are not enough to bring about a strong and robust improvement in Spain’s economy, and particularly to create jobs and boost productivity. To achieve these objectives, further progress must be made: in consolidating public finances, also to reduce the possible negative spillovers of the sovereign debt crisis to the banking sector;in liberalising product and factor markets, especially now the labour market with respect to “negociación colectiva” (collective bargaining).in improving the education system at all levels – it is critical to raising productivity over the medium term and, therefore, to improving welfare.I truly hope that when another book like this one is written in, say 50 or 100 years’ time, the authors will conclude that the steps taken in response to the crisis in the banking and in other key sectors of the Spanish economy were the right ones and, in particular, that they played a part in overcoming the crisis and increasing in a sustainable way the well-being of the citizens of this country. ReferencesAcharya and Richardson (eds.) (2009) Restoring Financial Stability: How to Repair a Failed System, John Wiley & Sons.Adrian, T. and H.S. Shin (2009), Money, liquidity and monetary policy, American Economic Review.Allen, F. and D. Gale (2000), Financial Contagion, Journal of Political Economy. Allen, F. and K. Rogoff (2011), Asset Prices, Financial Stability and Monetary Policy, Wharton Financial Institutions Centre WP #11-39.Altunbas, Y., Marqués, G. and L. Gambacorta (2010), Securitisation and the bank lending channel, European Economic Review.Brunnermeier, M. and L.H. Petersen (2009), Market liquidity and funding liquidity, Review of Financial Studies.Cuñat, V. and L. Garicano (2010), Did Good Cajas Extend Bad Loans? Governance, Human Capital and Loan Portfolios, LSE mimeo.Freixas, X. and J.C. Rochet (1997), Microeconomics of Banking, MIT Press.Hellmann, T., Murdock, K. and J. Stiglitz (2000), Liberalization, Moral Hazard in Banking, and Prudential Regulation: Are Capital Requirements Enough?, American Economic Review.Iyer, R. and J.L. Peydró (2011), Interbank Contagion at Work: Evidence from a Natural Experiment, Review of Financial Studies.Jiménez, G., Mian, A., Peydró, J.L. and J. Saurina (2010), Local versus Aggregate Lending Channels: The Effects of Securitization on Corporate Credit Supply in Spain, NBER WP 16595.Jiménez, G., Ongena, S., Peydró, J.L. and J. Saurina (forthcoming), Credit Availability: Identifying Balance-Sheet Channels with Loan Applications & Granted Loans, American Economic Review.Jiménez, G., Ongena, S., Peydró and J. Saurina (2011), Macroprudential Policy, Countercyclical Bank Capital Buffers and Credit Supply: Evidence from the Spanish Dynamic Provisioning Experiments, Bank of Spain mimeo. Jiménez, G., Ongena, S., Peydró-Alcalde, J.L. and J. Saurina (2011), Hazardous Times for Monetary Policy: What do 23 Million Loans Say About the Impact of Monetary Policy on Credit Risk-Taking?, CEPR DP 6514. Jiménez, G. and J. Saurina (2006), Credit cycles, credit risk and prudential regulation, International Journal of Central Banking. Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Pappaioannou, E. and J.L. Peydró (2010), What Lies Beneath the Euro, Journal of International Economics.Maddaloni, A. and J.L. Peydró (2011), Bank Risk-taking, Securitization, Supervision, and Low Interest Rates: Evidence from the Euro-area and the U.S. Lending Standards, Review of Financial Studies.Martínez-Miera, D. and R. Repullo (2010), Does Competition Reduce the Risk of Bank Failure? Review of Financial Studies (2010).Matutes, C. and X. Vives (2000), Imperfect competition, risk taking, and regulation in banking, European Economic Review. McConnell, M. and G. Perez Quiros (2000), Output Fluctuations in the United States: What Has Changed Since the Early 1980s?, American Economic Review.Mian, A. and A. Sufi (2009), The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis, Quarterly Journal of Economics.Morgan, D. (2002), Rating Banks: Risk and Uncertainty in an Opaque Industry, American Economic Review.Rajan and Diamond (2009), The Credit Crisis: Conjectures about Causes and Remedies, American Economic Review.Rochet and Vives (2004), Coordination Failures and the Lender of Last Resort: Was Bagehot Right After All?, Journal of the European Economic Association.[1]See also Stiglitz et al. (2000); Matutes and Vives (2000), and Martínez-Miera and Repullo (2010).[2]See Kalemli-Ozcan, Pappaioannou and Peydró (2010).[3]See Allen and Gale (2000).[4]See Brunnermeier and Petersen (2009).[5]See Mian and Sufi (2009); Maddaloni and Peydró (2011); Jiménez, Mian, Peydró and Sufi (2011), Altunbas, Marqués and Gambacorta (2010).[6]See Pérez-Quirós (2000); Adrian and Shin (2009); Allen and Rogoff (2011); Rajan and Diamond (2009); Jiménez et al. (2011); Jiménez and Saurina (2006). [7]See Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró and Saurina (2011).[8]See Iyer and Peydró (2011) and Rochet and Vives (2004).[9]See Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró and Saurina (forthcoming).[10]See Morgan (2002).[11]See Cuñat and Garicano (2010).[12]See Freixas and Rochet (1997) and Acharya and Richardson (2009).Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur opportun speak today bank spain spanish financi sector book present today consist distinguish collect essay provid wealth inform spain financi sector last centuri summaris key data main develop also provid deep analys definit becom work refer histori financi sector countri th centuri let congratul contributor editor josé lui malo de molina pablo martín aceña excel work read book notabl chapter raimundo poveda draw interest parallel current crisi bank crisi late earli particular given current circumst main messag would like emphasis today certain chang bank sector implement respons crise essenti guarante strong robust bank sector futur word implement reform chang bank sector bank crisi respect busi practic regul supervis potenti strengthen foundat bank sector therebi improv abil contribut sustain econom growth given limit time focus key structur develop bank sector taken place past twenti year describ analys sever chapter book addit examin regul introduc bank spain boom year help prevent mitig negat effect crisi especi reform structur chang current consid may substanti reduc fragil bank sector implement strengthen bank system ultim posit effect financi stabil econom growth spain see spain bank sector undergon two fundament chang sinc bank liberalis financi innov bank liberalis produc notabl increas competit among institut financi integr exampl caja save bank start compet geograph differ busi segment increas competit also led differ time year strong competit bank deposit e g la guerra del pasivo end general bank competit bring posit aspect real economi welfar doubt liberalis bank sector spain posit countri howev bear mind chapter book point much competit may signific increas bank risktak may negat implic may undermin financi stabil recent intens competit retail deposit may also notabl exampl regard anoth import aspect liberalis internationalis bank sector well explain book would like stress two aspect phenomenon foreign expans spanish bank particular santand bbva ii signific depend foreign liquid main intern wholesal market especi introduct euro expans abroad well execut definit bring benefit term geograph diversif becom clear crisi howev relianc fund abroad may bring fragil sourc liquid dri crisi shown previous bank crise bank typic suffer run retail deposit wherea nowaday run wholesalebas light sector aim diversifi sourc fund liquid second defin element past decad increas financi innov notabl securitis market fund securitis mani posit effect e g increas suppli bank credit privat sector thank greater bank liquid crucial segment economi small mediums firm may also signific benefit develop securitis time recent research shown securitis may lead lower bank standard ultim weaken financi stabil bank longer respons loan made fewer incent monitor loan besid period extens securitis bank know new loan securitis countri impli risk total born investor outsid bank ex ant incent screen notabl reduc import chang bank industri taken place ostens benign potenti danger macroeconom backdrop socal great moder inde protract period high econom growth low short longterm interest rate contribut give bank sector good year howev precis risk build excess moreov overlook macro fragil emerg benign macroeconom context exampl current account deficit share real estat sector activ around gdp element contribut credit boom throughout spanish economi particular real estat sector context let add crucial bank spain react well notabl introduc strict regulatori system special purpos vehicl signific restrict regulatori capit arbitrag introduc dynam provis may reduc high credit suppli good year without measur credit boom could even bigger moreov provis buffer vital crisi allow bank continu support credit avail key featur recent crisi view fragil liabil asset side bank coupl dens interlink global financi sector bank capit reserv transpar fund risk manag corpor govern micro especi macro supervis regul need adjust let start fragil liabil experienc sinc august fund liquid dryup said runup crisi spanish bank high depend foreign wholesal fund result sector whole end suffer depend bank hit bad bank liquid also depend crucial bank capit henc bank stronger balanc sheet suffer much less lack liquid liquid provid eurosystem vital minimis liquid shortag bank capit need stronger bank access privat fund liquid fragil asset import factor high volum credit risk grant good year bank took risk other real estat bubbl bank record substanti lower profit higher realiz potenti loan loss current crisi henc bank capit signific decreas especi group caja moreov cannot easili rais capit specif structur avail bank capit essenti two addit reason first bank capit crunch may lead credit crunch thus order help real economi recov weak bank need recapitalis recent regulatori chang capit spain crucial bank asset howev opaqu combin high leverag make recapitalis privat market difficult especi crisi period therefor reduc problem high transpar extrem import stress test bank spain public key bank variabl thus indispens exercis promot transpar small group bank cannot fulfil capit requir restructur may solut bank still high expos real estat asset balanc sheet new haircut introduc bank spain go right direct geograph diversif notabl internationalis bank better risk manag also crucial factor believ address current challeng also strengthen corpor govern utmost import avoid excess risktak word transpar risk manag import said incent well sens restructur group bank may vital second look futur crisi behind us higher bank capit requir also play posit role reduc incent excess bank risktak subject welcom chang made eu global bank regul supervis micro macrobas exampl basel iii packag regul level qualiti capit countercycl buffer capit liquid ratio etc develop macroprudenti supervis establish esrb eu chang bank sector current crisi nation eu global level make spanish bank sector stronger provid durabl support real economi happen crisi specif chang busi model restructur bank higherqu bank capit better risk manag improv transpar corpor govern well chang bank regul supervis factor contribut toward sustain econom growth howev necessari chang enough bring strong robust improv spain economi particular creat job boost product achiev object progress must made consolid public financ also reduc possibl negat spillov sovereign debt crisi bank sector liberalis product factor market especi labour market respect negociación colectiva collect bargain improv educ system level critic rais product medium term therefor improv welfar truli hope anoth book like one written say year time author conclud step taken respons crisi bank key sector spanish economi right one particular play part overcom crisi increas sustain way wellb citizen countri referencesacharya richardson ed restor financi stabil repair fail system wiley son adrian h shin money liquid monetari polici american econom review allen f d gale financi contagion journal polit economi allen f k rogoff asset price financi stabil monetari polici wharton financi institut centr wp altunba y marqué g l gambacorta securitis bank lend channel european econom review brunnermei m l h petersen market liquid fund liquid review financi studi cuñat v l garicano good caja extend bad loan govern human capit loan portfolio lse mimeo freixa x j c rochet microeconom bank mit press hellmann murdock k j stiglitz liber moral hazard bank prudenti regul capit requir enough american econom review iyer r j l peydró interbank contagion work evid natur experi review financi studi jiménez g mian peydró j l j saurina local versus aggreg lend channel effect securit corpor credit suppli spain nber wp jiménez g ongena peydró j l j saurina forthcom credit avail identifi balancesheet channel loan applic grant loan american econom review jiménez g ongena peydró j saurina macroprudenti polici countercycl bank capit buffer credit suppli evid spanish dynam provis experi bank spain mimeo jiménez g ongena peydróalcald j l j saurina hazard time monetari polici million loan say impact monetari polici credit risktak cepr dp jiménez g j saurina credit cycl credit risk prudenti regul intern journal central bank kalemliozcan pappaioannou e j l peydró lie beneath euro journal intern econom maddaloni j l peydró bank risktak securit supervis low interest rate evid euroarea u lend standard review financi studi martínezmiera d r repullo competit reduc risk bank failur review financi studi matut c x vive imperfect competit risk take regul bank european econom review mcconnel m g perez quiro output fluctuat unit state chang sinc earli american econom review mian sufi consequ mortgag credit expans evid u mortgag default crisi quarter journal econom morgan d rate bank risk uncertainti opaqu industri american econom review rajan diamond credit crisi conjectur caus remedi american econom review rochet vive coordin failur lender last resort bagehot right journal european econom associ see also stiglitz et al matut vive martínezmiera repullo see kalemliozcan pappaioannou peydró see allen gale see brunnermei petersen see mian sufi maddaloni peydró jiménez mian peydró sufi altunba marqué gambacorta see pérezquiró adrian shin allen rogoff rajan diamond jiménez et al jiménez saurina see jiménez ongena peydró saurina see iyer peydró rochet vive see jiménez ongena peydró saurina forthcom see morgan see cuñat garicano see freixa rochet acharya richardson reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en