Jürgen Stark: Financial stability – the role of central banks. A new task? A new strategy? New tools?,17-11-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,2151,"<p>It is a great pleasure for me to participate in the 12th Euro Finance Week conference which brings together such well-known experts in banking and finance.The subject of my talk, “ Financial stability – The role of central banks. A new task? A new strategy? New tools?”, will not have come as a surprise. But I should perhaps warn you that you should not be surprised either, if my answers to these questions sound rather sober to you.The severity of the economic crisis demonstrates the need to profoundly improve the functioning of the global financial system. Central banks have an important role to play in making this process a success. Public expectations appear to be running high on how central banks will cope with what has come to be perceived as a whole range of new tasks.Recent economic and financial information is encouraging. The free fall in economic activity has stopped and there is hope that the global recession has bottomed out. The recovery of global trade, the rebuilding of inventories and the positive impact of policy stimulus and liquidity support measures are, at the moment, the main drivers of economic activity. Moreover, money market tensions have eased, government and corporate bond spreads are declining, and stock market volatility has fallen. Yet, even if confidence is slowly returning, uncertainty remains high, and economic activity and employment are likely to remain volatile for a while.Are these favourable developments in economic and financial conditions genuine improvements, or are they due only to supportive fiscal and monetary policies? Is the economy on a path of sustainable recovery? Finding answers to these questions will demand a very close and ongoing monitoring of all economic and financial market developments over the period ahead.There are still a number of uncertainties involved, and these uncertainties will not simply resolve themselves over time. The answers largely hinge on the success of the measures taken in response to the crisis, and on the need for their being phased out in a timely manner. The response to the crisis should not sow the seeds for new imbalances. After extended discussions, we are moving closer to phasing out our liquidity measures, as not all of them will be needed to the same extent as in the past. Meeting the following challenges will be crucial:formulating and implementing medium-term-oriented macro policies as a precondition for sustained and more balanced global growth;intensifying efforts to undertake structural reforms;correctly timing and implementing exit policies so as to ensure fiscal sustainability and maintain price stability; andstrengthening the financial system and the global financial architecture so as to safeguard financial stability.The most recent discussions on financial stability have focused on regulation and the role central banks should play therein. Unfortunately, the change of market participants’ behaviour is not on top of the agenda. As the crisis is the result of many failings, let me recall the various lines of defence that should be in place in order to secure financial stability.The first line of defence is that market participants must be liable for their actions. They have to bear in mind the long-term risk that their actions might impose on financial institutions, and on the financial system as a whole. Economic and financial incentives have to be aligned with this simple principle. As yet, I have, however, not seen any significant change in the behaviour of market participants. The second line of defence rests on the transparency of the financial system, including its institutions, products and markets. It rests on the implementation of coherent international supervisory and regulatory standards. This requires an overhaul of supervision and regulation at both the macro and the micro-prudential level.The third line of defence rests on safeguarding liquidity conditions for markets and solvent institutions.The fourth line of defence involves governments applying clear and harmonised procedures to resolve matters when insolvencies of systemically important financial institutions occur.On the institutional side, we are seeing many encouraging developments, both globally and across Europe. In fact, some far-reaching changes in the global financial architecture are unfolding. All main central banks in the world are actively involved.The Heads of State or Governments have decided that the G20 would now be the premier international forum for international economic cooperation. At the recent summits in Washington, D.C., London and Pittsburgh, five areas were identified for joint action to improve global regulation and oversight, including:the strengthening of transparency and accountability;the establishment of a sound regulatory framework and, in particular, the enhancement of Basel II;the promotion of integrity in financial markets;the reinforcement of international cooperation; andthe reform of international financial institutions, such as the IMF whose tools, funding, governance structure and mandate have all been upgraded.Initiatives to safeguard financial stability are being coordinated at the global level by the Financial Stability Board (FSB). Central banks like the ECB are actively involved in this dialogue. But there are also important new initiatives in the area of both macro and micro-prudential supervision at the level of the European Union.Macro-prudential supervision in the EU is to be entrusted to the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). The ECB will provide analytical and logistical support to the ESRB. The main task of the ESRB will be to identify, monitor and assess potential risks to financial stability in the EU that arise from the macroeconomic environment, as well as from developments within the financial system itself. If any risk appears to be significant, the ESRB would issue risk warnings and make recommendations. The ESRB will, however, not have regulatory powers, nor will it have any operational tools at its disposal.At the micro-prudential level, the European System of Financial Supervisors is to be established. It will consist of three European Supervisory Authorities to deal with banking, securities and insurance respectively. It will promote supervisory convergence and coordination at the EU level. The same objective is being pursued through the establishment of groups of supervisors for large international financial corporations.The best contribution central banks can make to ensure financial stability is to maintain price stability. Price stability is a precondition for financial stability. At the same time, financial stability, by ensuring an orderly functioning of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, helps a central bank in fostering price stability. Hence, from a longer-term perspective, financial stability and price stability are mutually reinforcing policy objectives.At shorter horizons, financial stability and price stability may not always go hand in hand. Developments in the run-up to the crisis have shown that low and stable inflation rates may well be consistent with the build-up of financial imbalances which, in turn, can create serious risks to price stability. There are, however, safeguards that a central bank can build into its policy framework.One of the lessons central bankers can learn from the crisis is that a monetary policy with a pre-specified, fixed-term policy horizon runs the risk of having too short-sighted a perspective of the economy. We have always argued that our monetary policy strategy provides for a safeguard against such short-termism.We have defined price stability as an objective that is to be maintained over a medium-term horizon. This medium-term orientation is underpinned by our monetary analysis. A key aspect of monetary analysis is the identification of low-frequency trends in inflation, as determined by monetary developments. Financial imbalances that lead to excess credit growth, high leverage, loose credit standards, booming asset prices and an under-pricing of risk create the conditions for abrupt market corrections, which ultimately endanger the maintenance of price stability. Analysing developments in credit, the counterpart to money on monetary financial institutions’ balance sheets, is useful in identifying such imbalances.In situations of excessive money and credit growth, monetary policy needs to be more restrictive than warranted on the basis of short-term inflationary trends. While such a “leaning-against-the-wind” approach would depress short-term inflation, it would be effective in maintaining price stability over the medium to long term. It would attenuate further rises in asset prices and credit growth and thereby forestall subsequent adverse effects on price stability once a correction takes place.The Governing Council had already agreed in the spring of 2007 – i.e. before the crisis started – to enhance and broaden the monetary analysis along four main avenues: improving and broadening money demand models to detect any possible build-up of financial imbalances; developing money-based indicators of risks to price stability; incorporating money and credit in structural general equilibrium models to signal possible financial vulnerabilities; andfurther deepening the framework for cross-checking between the economic and monetary analysis (the two pillars of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy).Bearing these considerations in mind, it is rather straightforward to answer the questions posed by the organisers of this conference.The primary objective of the ECB is the maintenance of price stability. This mandate, which has been given to us in the Treaty, will remain unchanged. The Treaty also clarifies that there is no trade-off between this objective and the support that the ECB can lend to the general objectives of the Community.The assignment to the ECB of specific tasks concerning the functioning of the ESRB is welcome, but does not constitute an additional objective for monetary policy. Nor does the creation of the ESRB change the clear allocation of responsibilities enshrined in the Treaty. The integrity of the overall macroeconomic analysis conducted within the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) will remain untouched.The ESRB and its members will be provided with a high degree of independence from political influence. In this regard, the ECB’s activities in supporting the ESRB will not affect the ECB’s institutional, functional and financial independence. Nor will it affect the ESCB’s performance of its tasks under the Treaty and the Statute of the ESCB and of the ECB.From the perspective of the ECB’s monetary policy, the envisaged establishment of the ESRB will have both potential benefits and risks. The fact that the ECB will be able, through its analytical and statistical infrastructure, to contribute to the pursuit of financial stability in the EU is a great opportunity. In turn, the risk analysis of the ESRB can provide the ECB with useful additional information for the fulfilment of the latter’s mandate to maintain price stability.Our strategy has proven to be sufficiently comprehensive and robust. What we have seen in the run-up to the crisis, and also during the crisis, is that the monetary analysis provides a channel through which elements pertaining to financial stability can be taken into account. Our strategy provides us with a framework to ensure that potential imbalances in credit developments are not neglected.According to our mandate, our primary objective is to maintain price stability. The tool at our disposal for achieving this is sufficient: setting short-term interest rates. As the ECB’s mandate remains unchanged, there is no need for any additional tools.What we need for macro-prudential assessment instead is a further development of the available analytical framework. Some of the elements we already use to assess threats to price stability are also relevant for the assessment of threats to financial stability. The monetary analysis is a case in point.The analytical frameworks used for monetary policy and financial stability purposes have, however, thus far reached very different stages of “maturity”. Compared with price stability, financial stability has remained a rather elusive concept. In supervision – not least at the cross-border level – the allocation of responsibilities, democratic legitimacy and the appropriate design of incentive structures have remained debatable issues. The framework for macro-prudential analysis still needs to be “mapped out” and tested in full.Let me conclude.Expectations are running high on how central banks will cope with what some anticipate will be a whole range of new responsibilities.Hence, the questions posed in the title of my talk. As we need to be clear about what we can and what we cannot do, my answers to these questions are rather sober. We do not have a new mandate. We do not need a new strategy. We do not need a new operational tool. Most importantly, our commitment to maintaining price stability remains unchanged, especially in today’s challenging environment.The costs of the crisis are staggering. Our current efforts will affect the future magnitude and duration of its legacy costs. The challenges could not be more demanding. We have to remove incentives for moral hazard and ensure that financial market participants are accountable for their decisions. We must not add new incentives for moral hazard by creating an “emergency fund” for banks, financed or co-financed by taxpayers’ money. Now is the time to act; to ensure that financial institutions can never again hold hostage the economic well-being of people who had no part in those institutions’ irresponsible business decisions.Thank you for your attention.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",great pleasur particip th euro financ week confer bring togeth wellknown expert bank financ subject talk financi stabil role central bank new task new strategi new tool come surpris perhap warn surpris either answer question sound rather sober sever econom crisi demonstr need profound improv function global financi system central bank import role play make process success public expect appear run high central bank cope come perceiv whole rang new task recent econom financi inform encourag free fall econom activ stop hope global recess bottom recoveri global trade rebuild inventori posit impact polici stimulus liquid support measur moment main driver econom activ moreov money market tension eas govern corpor bond spread declin stock market volatil fallen yet even confid slowli return uncertainti remain high econom activ employ like remain volatil favour develop econom financi condit genuin improv due support fiscal monetari polici economi path sustain recoveri find answer question demand close ongo monitor econom financi market develop period ahead still number uncertainti involv uncertainti simpli resolv time answer larg hing success measur taken respons crisi need phase time manner respons crisi sow seed new imbal extend discuss move closer phase liquid measur need extent past meet follow challeng crucial formul implement mediumtermori macro polici precondit sustain balanc global growth intensifi effort undertak structur reform correct time implement exit polici ensur fiscal sustain maintain price stabil andstrengthen financi system global financi architectur safeguard financi stabil recent discuss financi stabil focus regul role central bank play therein unfortun chang market particip behaviour top agenda crisi result mani fail let recal various line defenc place order secur financi stabil first line defenc market particip must liabl action bear mind longterm risk action might impos financi institut financi system whole econom financi incent align simpl principl yet howev seen signific chang behaviour market particip second line defenc rest transpar financi system includ institut product market rest implement coher intern supervisori regulatori standard requir overhaul supervis regul macro microprudenti level third line defenc rest safeguard liquid condit market solvent institut fourth line defenc involv govern appli clear harmonis procedur resolv matter insolv system import financi institut occur institut side see mani encourag develop global across europ fact farreach chang global financi architectur unfold main central bank world activ involv head state govern decid g would premier intern forum intern econom cooper recent summit washington d c london pittsburgh five area identifi joint action improv global regul oversight includ strengthen transpar account establish sound regulatori framework particular enhanc basel ii promot integr financi market reinforc intern cooper andth reform intern financi institut imf whose tool fund govern structur mandat upgrad initi safeguard financi stabil coordin global level financi stabil board fsb central bank like ecb activ involv dialogu also import new initi area macro microprudenti supervis level european union macroprudenti supervis eu entrust european system risk board esrb ecb provid analyt logist support esrb main task esrb identifi monitor assess potenti risk financi stabil eu aris macroeconom environ well develop within financi system risk appear signific esrb would issu risk warn make recommend esrb howev regulatori power oper tool dispos microprudenti level european system financi supervisor establish consist three european supervisori author deal bank secur insur respect promot supervisori converg coordin eu level object pursu establish group supervisor larg intern financi corpor best contribut central bank make ensur financi stabil maintain price stabil price stabil precondit financi stabil time financi stabil ensur order function transmiss mechan monetari polici help central bank foster price stabil henc longerterm perspect financi stabil price stabil mutual reinforc polici object shorter horizon financi stabil price stabil may alway go hand hand develop runup crisi shown low stabl inflat rate may well consist buildup financi imbal turn creat serious risk price stabil howev safeguard central bank build polici framework one lesson central banker learn crisi monetari polici prespecifi fixedterm polici horizon run risk shortsight perspect economi alway argu monetari polici strategi provid safeguard shortterm defin price stabil object maintain mediumterm horizon mediumterm orient underpin monetari analysi key aspect monetari analysi identif lowfrequ trend inflat determin monetari develop financi imbal lead excess credit growth high leverag loos credit standard boom asset price underpr risk creat condit abrupt market correct ultim endang mainten price stabil analys develop credit counterpart money monetari financi institut balanc sheet use identifi imbal situat excess money credit growth monetari polici need restrict warrant basi shortterm inflationari trend leaningagainstthewind approach would depress shortterm inflat would effect maintain price stabil medium long term would attenu rise asset price credit growth therebi forestal subsequ advers effect price stabil correct take place govern council alreadi agre spring e crisi start enhanc broaden monetari analysi along four main avenu improv broaden money demand model detect possibl buildup financi imbal develop moneybas indic risk price stabil incorpor money credit structur general equilibrium model signal possibl financi vulner andfurth deepen framework crosscheck econom monetari analysi two pillar ecb monetari polici strategi bear consider mind rather straightforward answer question pose organis confer primari object ecb mainten price stabil mandat given us treati remain unchang treati also clarifi tradeoff object support ecb lend general object communiti assign ecb specif task concern function esrb welcom constitut addit object monetari polici creation esrb chang clear alloc respons enshrin treati integr overal macroeconom analysi conduct within european system central bank escb remain untouch esrb member provid high degre independ polit influenc regard ecb activ support esrb affect ecb institut function financi independ affect escb perform task treati statut escb ecb perspect ecb monetari polici envisag establish esrb potenti benefit risk fact ecb abl analyt statist infrastructur contribut pursuit financi stabil eu great opportun turn risk analysi esrb provid ecb use addit inform fulfil latter mandat maintain price stabil strategi proven suffici comprehens robust seen runup crisi also crisi monetari analysi provid channel element pertain financi stabil taken account strategi provid us framework ensur potenti imbal credit develop neglect accord mandat primari object maintain price stabil tool dispos achiev suffici set shortterm interest rate ecb mandat remain unchang need addit tool need macroprudenti assess instead develop avail analyt framework element alreadi use assess threat price stabil also relev assess threat financi stabil monetari analysi case point analyt framework use monetari polici financi stabil purpos howev thus far reach differ stage matur compar price stabil financi stabil remain rather elus concept supervis least crossbord level alloc respons democrat legitimaci appropri design incent structur remain debat issu framework macroprudenti analysi still need map test full let conclud expect run high central bank cope anticip whole rang new respons henc question pose titl talk need clear cannot answer question rather sober new mandat need new strategi need new oper tool import commit maintain price stabil remain unchang especi today challeng environ cost crisi stagger current effort affect futur magnitud durat legaci cost challeng could demand remov incent moral hazard ensur financi market particip account decis must add new incent moral hazard creat emerg fund bank financ cofinanc taxpay money time act ensur financi institut never hold hostag econom wellb peopl part institut irrespons busi decis thank attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en