"Jean-Claude Trichet: The US economy, the euro area economy, and their central banks",07-12-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,3980,"<p>Sehr geehrte Damen und Herren,ich freue mich, heute Abend gemeinsam mit Ihnen diese festliche Atmosphäre genießen zu dürfen, und es ist mir eine Ehre, der Hauptredner der Verleihung dieses Journalistenpreises zu sein. Ich danke Ihnen, Herrn Kai-Jacob Klasen, herzlich für die Einladung und finde es bewegend, heute Abend im Rahmen dieser Veranstaltung Dr. Karl Klasen zu gedenken.Die Stiftung, die diese Preisverleihung ausrichtet, hat sich das lobenswerte Ziel gesetzt, Journalisten zu Arbeiten über die deutsch-amerikanischen Beziehungen zu inspirieren, und zeichnet diejenigen aus, die sich durch ihre Beiträge um die Festigung der Bindungen zwischen Deutschland und den USA verdient gemacht haben. Was die Geldpolitik anbelangt, so stehen die transatlantischen Beziehungen nun im breiteren Kontext der Interaktionen zwischen dem Eurosystem und dem Federal Reserve System. In meiner Funktion als Präsident der Europäischen Zentralbank habe ich mich stets darum bemüht, die engen und freundschaftlichen Verbindungen zu unseren US‑amerikanischen Kollegen zu pflegen und zu stärken.[Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a pleasure for me to be here today in this festive atmosphere, and an honour to be the main speaker at this journalist award ceremony. I am very grateful, Mr Kai-Jacob Klasen, for your invitation, and I am moved to pay tribute tonight to the memory of Dr Karl Klasen. The foundation hosting this ceremony has the commendable purpose of inspiring and rewarding journalists’ works that strengthen German-American relationships. In the area of monetary policy, transatlantic relations are now written in the broader context of the interactions between the Eurosystem and the Federal Reserve System, and it has always been my aim, as President of the European Central Bank, to preserve and foster close and friendly relationships with our American counterpart.]The goal of my talk today is to show that it is worth pursuing and extending this relationship. The euro area and the United States share some common external and internal experiences that justify the increasing cooperation that exists both at the policy and institutional levels. To convince you of this, I will first show that the United States and the euro area face a similar external environment and that their economic and financial connections have been reinforced in the context of globalisation. I will then argue that the monetary authorities of the United States and the euro area face common features due to a certain degree of internal diversity within such large economic areas. This is why sharing our thoughts and experiences always proves invaluable in our duty to ensure efficient monetary policy. In the last section of my talk, I will demonstrate how this interaction is facilitated by institutional cooperation and the development of personal contacts with our American colleagues. The euro area and the United States are the largest economies in the world, hosting more than 600 million inhabitants and responsible for around 40% of world production. The preponderance of these two regions and their similar size naturally calls for parallels to be made. Viewed from outside, these two regions are large economic blocs that have led globalisation and the surge in world trade, financial flows and innovative ideas that has been getting stronger during the last few decades. The euro area is the largest exporter in the world. Its extra-area exports amounted to €1.9 trillion last year, while US exports reached €1.1 trillion. Together, these two economies account for almost a third of world trade. The euro area is a significantly open economy for its size. Its exports and imports of goods reached 33% of its own GDP in 2006, a figure to add to the rising importance of trade in services – around 10% of GDP. In 1998, euro area exports and imports only accounted for 24% of GDP, and trade in services for 8%. Trade openness of the euro area has therefore been reinforced since the advent of the euro. The United States is slightly less open, with trade in goods representing 22% of GDP and trade in services 6% of GDP. However, among euro area trade partners, the United States plays a central role. Indeed, around 15% of euro exports in goods goes to the United States. Looking at the other side of the Atlantic, American exports represent around 10% of our imports of goods. On balance, over the last few years, we have recorded a large trade surplus with the United States. Our goods exports exceeded our imports from the United States by more than USD 80 billion. In the services sector, where trade has been growing and continues to grow, our connection with the United States is even more important. 22% of our services exports goes to the United States and a quarter of our imports come from the United States. In particular, the export performance of our travel and transportation services is always outstanding.Nevertheless, most euro area trade occurs with our European neighbours, and with Japan and China. This could suggest that the linkages between the United States and the euro area are of a secondary importance. However, this would underestimate the significance of the US economy because there are also indirect transmission channels. Indeed, the United States plays a broader role in the world economy, and there can be second-round effects that are not captured by the crude figures I have just presented. These second-round effects include trade linkages, but also financial and confidence linkages. After the financial turmoil experienced this summer, it is becoming increasingly important to understand them.The United States, where the recent financial troubles originated, and the euro area are very open to financial flows. US external assets and liabilities exceeded USD 13 trillion in 2005, and the figure for the euro area is very similar. In percentage of GDP, US external assets represented 90 % of US GDP and US external liabilities amounted to 110 % of GDP in 2005. As regards the euro area in 2005 as well, external assets represented 124 % of euro area GDP and external liabilities reached 137 % of euro area GDP ; therefore, in relative terms, the euro area is financially more open that the United States. European investors are also central players in American markets. As an example, the euro area stock of direct investment in the United States reached more than €600 billion at the end of 2006. Some industries are particularly present in the United States: the trade and the financial sector, of course, but also the chemical industries of France, Germany and the Netherlands have large investments at stake in the United States. The situation is fairly similar in the other direction, with around €630 billion from US firms being invested in the euro area, principally in the services industries of Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands. The current levels of FDI flows show that these bilateral links will continue to strengthen in the future. Portfolio investments from the euro area to the United States are also of an impressive magnitude. The stock of US portfolio assets held by the euro area reached almost €1.5 trillion last year, this being about a third of European holdings worldwide. The euro and the US dollar are also the currencies of denomination of the majority of portfolio assets traded. More than three-quarters of portfolio assets worldwide are denominated in euro and in dollars, according to the available data. [1]All in all, the United States and the euro area are large trade and financial partners. Arguably, the United States seems to have a greater impact on world business cycles, probably mainly because of the growing importance of financial channels in the transmission of macroeconomic shocks. For both the United States and the euro area, trade and financial channels have, of course, direct consequences for monetary policy. For instance, the increase in imports from low-cost countries has ensured that import price inflation has remained contained. Import prices declined in the period 2001-2003 in the euro area and remained stable throughout the following years. However, commodity prices experienced higher levels of inflation as a result of the strong growth of emerging economies such as India and China. Globalisation can therefore have mixed effects on inflation. Finally, it has also been argued that both the United States and the euro area witnessed a loosening of the link between inflation and activity because of increased openness. This has important implications for monetary policy.Although we have seen that the environment outside the euro area and the United States has gained importance, the internal economic situation remains a major focus of attention within central banks. Almost nine years after the euro changeover, euro area macroeconomic developments continue to mask some diversity across the euro area countries. Nonetheless, this diversity in terms of inflation and output growth is currently of approximately the same scale as in the United States. More specifically, euro area inflation differentials have exhibited a strong decline in recent decades. Starting from an unweighted standard deviation of around 6 percentage points at the beginning of the 1990s, inflation dispersion has fallen to around only half a percentage point so far in 2007. More specifically, this year there has been an overall decline in inflation rates among traditional high-inflation countries compared with last year. However, since August, inflation rates in all countries have risen, probably as a result of higher oil and food prices. This implies that dispersion in the euro area is currently somewhat below inflation dispersion among the 14 US Metropolitan Statistical Areas, where it has fluctuated around 1 percentage point over the last two decades. The dispersion in real GDP growth rates, measured in terms of the unweighted standard deviation, has been moving around a level of 2 percentage points over the past few decades, with no apparent upward or downward trend. This is similar to the dispersion witnessed in output growth across regions within the United States.A key feature of the observed economic diversity is the persistence of macroeconomic developments across euro area countries. For example, the difference in the cumulated growth of real GDP between the two euro area countries with the largest and the smallest output increases, respectively, was more than 50 percentage points in the period 1998-2006. The situation was similar across US states. Furthermore, the equivalent accumulated spread between the two euro area countries with the lowest and highest inflation rates was almost 20 percentage points and in unit labour costs for the total economy between 20 and 25 percentage points over the same period. In the United States, the spread in CPI inflation between the two Metropolitan Areas with the lowest and highest inflation rates was slightly lower, at around 18% for the same period.In the euro area, in addition to the decline in dispersion of inflation, activity and labour cost developments, another key feature is that business cycles are converging and output gap fluctuations are becoming more similar across countries. This feature is not apparent in the United States, where the dispersion of cycles and of trend GDP growth, seem to explain roughly equal parts of growth dispersion between states. For instance, last year, the acceleration in activity and the rebound in the euro area’s real GDP growth was a widely shared phenomenon across the various euro area member countries. Hence, registered growth dispersion across the euro area countries seems to be mainly explained by differences in trend output growth, rather than cyclical developments, a feature I would like to reflect more on.The differences in trend output growth in the euro area might reveal structural factors that are a normal feature in a monetary union. Differences in trend output growth may, for instance, reflect diverse initial conditions and catching-up processes in some countries. For example, in recent years, per capita income in Ireland has risen from a level well below that of the euro area in the early 1990s to a level well above. In the early 1990s the GDP per capita of Ireland represented 75 % of the average of what were to become the first 12 euro area countries. Last year, the level in Ireland was about 30% above the euro area level. Moreover, a country may experience an equilibrating adjustment process following a shock. Diversity stemming from these factors is also economically justified, needed and observed within other currency areas. In an environment of high adjustment capacity, such divergences can be interpreted as a desirable equilibrating mechanism, contributing to sustainable convergence among euro area countries.However, in some cases, persistent macroeconomic differentials may reflect inappropriate national policies, structural inefficiencies and rigidities or a malfunctioning adjustment mechanism in individual euro area countries. Differentials resulting from such factors may be detrimental to the dynamics of economic activity and employment. These are sources of macroeconomic differentials that policy-makers should be concerned about and where measures should be taken at the national level in order to increase economic flexibility.Starting with monetary policy, the single monetary policy with a uniform policy interest rate for the euro area countries cannot, as you know, directly influence diversity in output growth or inflation across the euro area countries. This emphasises the importance of only those countries that have reached sustainable convergence – as prescribed in the Maastricht criteria – participating in the euro area. Well-designed structural policies – undertaken at the national level – should be implemented to enhance flexibility in product and labour markets and thereby increase the adjustment capacity of economies. Such reforms should aim to enhance productivity growth and labour utilisation while maintaining stable macroeconomnic conditions. In this context, the Lisbon strategy is a fundamental and ambitious programme to draw our attention to the urgency of such structural reforms. The United States, where cross-state labour is higher, could also be considered to be a role model for Europe.Speaking to an audience of journalists and business executives, I am well aware of the hard task you are confronted with – that of conveying the message about the beneficial effects of reforms in growth and job creation. In this context, it is essential to understand and communicate that the medium to long-term benefits of structural reforms will significantly reward the initial investment. I can only encourage all responsible parties in these communication efforts.More specifically, on the labour market, economic flexibility can be promoted by removing the institutional barriers to flexible wage and price-setting mechanisms. Let me stress that social partners share responsibility for ensuring that wage determination appropriately takes into account productivity and labour market conditions at the industrial, sectoral and regional level and does not jeopardise competitiveness or employment. And one should also take into account the fact that wage setting in the public sector often serves as a role model for the private sector. In addition, early retirement policies have a significant negative impact on labour supply and, hence, on the participation and employment rate. In the context of wage setting, sufficient wage differentiation is needed to improve employment opportunities for less-skilled workers and in regions or sectors with high unemployment. Reforms are also needed in product markets. Let me stress the importance of fully completing the Single Market, particularly in services and network industries. A deeper integration of markets would stimulate price flexibility by fostering competition and open product markets. This requires that existing barriers to labour and capital mobility within the euro area be removed. Greater cross-border competition and the integration of markets across the euro area countries would contribute to lower prices, an area in which Europe may again find an interesting benchmark in the United States. These reforms could also enhance adjustment processes in individual countries in the event of asymmetric shocks or differing cyclical developments. National authorities can make a substantial contribution, not only by implementing sound structural policies, but also by ensuring a proper functioning of adjustment mechanisms within the euro area and by implementing well-designed fiscal policies. Here, I would like to repeat that the best contribution fiscal policy can make to the proper functioning of the euro area is to be sustainable and medium-term oriented, fully in line with the orientations provided by the Stability and Growth Pact. Moreover, fiscal policy can and should also focus on increasing effectiveness and efficiency of the public sector itself through “high quality” expenditure and tax policies. Large and inefficient public sectors can put the brakes on economic activity by imposing a high tax burden on the economy and channelling resources into unproductive uses. There, speaking in Germany, I have to mention that Germany itself has been exemplary in containing overall public spending as a proportion of GDP over the last years despite many challenges and a difficult environment. In 2007 the Commission estimates that public spendings will represent 43.8 % of GDP, which is 4.3 percentage points less than in 1999.I hope I have by now convinced you that the monetary authorities in the United States and the euro area face challenges that are similar. Internally, diversity in these large areas is of the same magnitude, although possibly not of the same nature. Externally, both regions count on a large external sector, with significant bilateral linkages. Similar experiences naturally call for close working relations. This interaction has become particularly intense since the advent of the euro and the setting up of the European Central Bank and of the Eurosystem, but at the same time builds on a long-standing history of central bank multilateral cooperation in various international institutions and fora, including the Bank for International Settlements since the 1930s, the International Monetary Fund since the mid-1940s, the G10 since the 1960s, the G7 since the mid-1970s and, more recently, the Financial Stability Forum and the Group of Twenty.These international organisations provide an excellent opportunity for the Federal Reserve Chairman and myself, for the members of the Boards as well as for the staff of both the Fed and the ECB/Eurosystem, to meet very regularly. To give you some idea of the level of contact we have, I can say that Ben and I meet, through the G7, the G10, the G20, the IMF and BIS meetings, probably a little more than once a month on average. In addition, Mr Bernanke and I jointly participate in a number of international conferences.Indeed, through our regular meetings, Ben and I have built up a very close working relationship, a climate of mutual trust, and a platform for direct and quick contact in special circumstances that would require urgent communication. Why is this important? The purpose of our contact is not the coordination of our monetary policies. This would be incompatible with the orientation of our policies towards our respective domestic objectives. Rather, the benefit of our close contact lies in the in-depth exchange of information and views on recent economic developments, on the monetary, financial and economic outlook in our respective economies, and on the policy challenges ahead. This includes, as I discussed before, trade and financial linkages between our two economies, directly or via other economies. Sharing first-hand knowledge on the world outlook and on how we see our respective domestic economies influencing and being influenced by the global outlook is extremely important in today’s globalised economy.On very rare occasions in the past, our close working relationship has also permitted to work out swift action. A prime example of this is the decision the ECB took in the very afternoon of the day of the terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001. A second example is the decisions we took to help stabilising money market conditions during the financial market turmoil of last summer. Here again, close contact with the Fed proved extremely useful in sharing information on the financial conditions and central bank actions in our respective economies.The close contact I have with the Chairman is, as you see, only the tip of the “iceberg”. Our two institutions collaborate closely at all possible levels, involving Board members, management and staff. Across various domains of central banking, we have set up joint platforms for the regular exchange of information. In the field of economic research, we have set up the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy to discuss theoretical and empirical aspects of monetary policy. So far, four conferences have been organised, and a fifth one is scheduled for June 2008. In the area of payment and settlement systems and infrastructure, we have organised a number of joint conferences, for instance in April 2006 on central counterparty clearing, as well as regular meetings with the Federal Reserve Board. Even in an area such as education, we have undertaken joint work, for example at the conference on the Role of Central Banks in Economic and Personal Finance Education in Poland in 2006, organised by Narodowy Bank Polski, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the ECB.Our ties are also facilitated by geographic proximity. You may be surprised to hear me mention geographic proximity, given that the centres of the Eurosystem and Federal Reserve System are in Frankfurt and Washington respectively. However, the ECB maintains a permanent representative office at the IMF, only a few streets away from the Federal Reserve Board in Washington. Though liaison with the Federal Reserve is not its main raison d'être, this office is another channel for closer contact and interaction.Staff members of the two central banks also participate regularly in conferences organised by the other institution. For instance, so far in 2007, over ten staff members of the ECB, the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve District Banks have presented their research work in seminars and conferences organised by one of these institutions. Staff members also regularly visit the other central bank, spending several days discussing research work or technical issues. On some occasions, these stays even run over several months. Since 2003, six ECB staff members have spent a total of 40 months at the Federal Reserve Board and District Banks as part of the ECB’s External Work Experience programme. And I do not mention here the many many relationships that are established between the national central banks of the Eurosystem and the Federal Reserve System. Ladies and gentlemen, allow me to conclude.The euro area and the United States are large economic blocs which are, at the same time, largely open to world markets. The last decades, in particular, have witnessed a tightening of the trade and financial linkages and the bilateral relationships between the United States and the euro area have been reinforced. As a result, central banks worldwide, and in particular the Federal Reserve and the Eurosystem, always keep an eye on partners’ economic, monetary and financial developments. The ECB and the Federal Reserve System have many opportunities to share their experience and technical expertise, whether through discussions within international meetings or in informal ways through conferences, staff visits, personal contacts of all nature, including confident personal relationships at the level of Chairmen. I would also like to point to one example of cooperation that might look unusual. Last year, we had one case of cooperation in the domain of culture and arts, as the Federal Reserve exhibited a remarkable set of the art works of its collection at the premises of the ECB in Frankfurt. This art exhibition was another symbolic illustration of our close cross-Atlantic ties, in which tonight’s journalist prize ceremony also plays a part. I have always been convinced that a very strong relationship between both sides of the Atlantic is essential for the stability and continued prosperity of our respective continents but also for the continuing stability and prosperity of the global economy itself. This is today particularly true in a period of immense opportunities and of significant challenges.Thank you very much for your attention.Bayoumi T. and A. Swiston (2007), Foreign Entanglements: Estimating the Source and Size of Spillovers Across Industrial Countries, IMF Working Paper 07/182.Calza A. and S. Dées (2007), The Euro Area in the Global Economy: Its Sensitivity to the International Environment and Its Influence on Global Economic Developments, in Di Mauro and Anderton (eds.), The External Dimension of the Euro Area: Assessing the Linkages, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Di Mauro F., L.V. Smith, S. Dées and M. H. Pesaran (2007), Exploring the international linkages of the euro area: a global VAR analysis, Journal of Applied Econometrics, vol. 22(1), pages 1-38.[1] CPIS data, IMF, 2005.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",sehr geehrt damen und herren ich freue mich heut abend gemeinsam mit ihnen dies festlich atmosphär genießen zu dürfen und es ist mir ein ehr der hauptredn der verleihung dies journalistenpreis zu sein ich dank ihnen herrn kaijacob klasen herzlich für die einladung und find es bewegend heut abend im rahmen dieser veranstaltung dr klasen zu gedenken die stiftung die dies preisverleihung ausrichtet hat sich das lobenswert ziel gesetzt journalisten zu arbeiten über die deutschamerikanischen beziehungen zu inspirieren und zeichnet diejenigen aus die sich durch ihr beiträg um die festigung der bindungen zwischen deutschland und den usa verdient gemacht haben die geldpolitik anbelangt stehen die transatlantischen beziehungen nun im breiteren kontext der interaktionen zwischen dem eurosystem und dem feder reserv system meiner funktion al präsident der europäischen zentralbank habe ich mich stet darum bemüht die engen und freundschaftlichen verbindungen zu unseren us amerikanischen kollegen zu pflegen und zu stärken ladi gentlemen pleasur today festiv atmospher honour main speaker journalist award ceremoni grate mr kaijacob klasen invit move pay tribut tonight memori dr klasen foundat host ceremoni commend purpos inspir reward journalist work strengthen germanamerican relationship area monetari polici transatlant relat written broader context interact eurosystem feder reserv system alway aim presid european central bank preserv foster close friend relationship american counterpart goal talk today show worth pursu extend relationship euro area unit state share common extern intern experi justifi increas cooper exist polici institut level convinc first show unit state euro area face similar extern environ econom financi connect reinforc context globalis argu monetari author unit state euro area face common featur due certain degre intern divers within larg econom area share thought experi alway prove invalu duti ensur effici monetari polici last section talk demonstr interact facilit institut cooper develop person contact american colleagu euro area unit state largest economi world host million inhabit respons around world product preponder two region similar size natur call parallel made view outsid two region larg econom bloc led globalis surg world trade financi flow innov idea get stronger last decad euro area largest export world extraarea export amount trillion last year us export reach trillion togeth two economi account almost third world trade euro area signific open economi size export import good reach gdp figur add rise import trade servic around gdp euro area export import account gdp trade servic trade open euro area therefor reinforc sinc advent euro unit state slight less open trade good repres gdp trade servic gdp howev among euro area trade partner unit state play central role inde around euro export good goe unit state look side atlant american export repres around import good balanc last year record larg trade surplus unit state good export exceed import unit state usd billion servic sector trade grow continu grow connect unit state even import servic export goe unit state quarter import come unit state particular export perform travel transport servic alway outstand nevertheless euro area trade occur european neighbour japan china could suggest linkag unit state euro area secondari import howev would underestim signific us economi also indirect transmiss channel inde unit state play broader role world economi secondround effect captur crude figur present secondround effect includ trade linkag also financi confid linkag financi turmoil experienc summer becom increas import understand unit state recent financi troubl origin euro area open financi flow us extern asset liabil exceed usd trillion figur euro area similar percentag gdp us extern asset repres us gdp us extern liabil amount gdp regard euro area well extern asset repres euro area gdp extern liabil reach euro area gdp therefor relat term euro area financi open unit state european investor also central player american market exampl euro area stock direct invest unit state reach billion end industri particular present unit state trade financi sector cours also chemic industri franc germani netherland larg invest stake unit state situat fair similar direct around billion us firm invest euro area princip servic industri belgium luxembourg netherland current level fdi flow show bilater link continu strengthen futur portfolio invest euro area unit state also impress magnitud stock us portfolio asset held euro area reach almost trillion last year third european hold worldwid euro us dollar also currenc denomin major portfolio asset trade threequart portfolio asset worldwid denomin euro dollar accord avail data unit state euro area larg trade financi partner arguabl unit state seem greater impact world busi cycl probabl main grow import financi channel transmiss macroeconom shock unit state euro area trade financi channel cours direct consequ monetari polici instanc increas import lowcost countri ensur import price inflat remain contain import price declin period euro area remain stabl throughout follow year howev commod price experienc higher level inflat result strong growth emerg economi india china globalis therefor mix effect inflat final also argu unit state euro area wit loosen link inflat activ increas open import implic monetari polici although seen environ outsid euro area unit state gain import intern econom situat remain major focus attent within central bank almost nine year euro changeov euro area macroeconom develop continu mask divers across euro area countri nonetheless divers term inflat output growth current approxim scale unit state specif euro area inflat differenti exhibit strong declin recent decad start unweight standard deviat around percentag point begin inflat dispers fallen around half percentag point far specif year overal declin inflat rate among tradit highinfl countri compar last year howev sinc august inflat rate countri risen probabl result higher oil food price impli dispers euro area current somewhat inflat dispers among us metropolitan statist area fluctuat around percentag point last two decad dispers real gdp growth rate measur term unweight standard deviat move around level percentag point past decad appar upward downward trend similar dispers wit output growth across region within unit state key featur observ econom divers persist macroeconom develop across euro area countri exampl differ cumul growth real gdp two euro area countri largest smallest output increas respect percentag point period situat similar across us state furthermor equival accumul spread two euro area countri lowest highest inflat rate almost percentag point unit labour cost total economi percentag point period unit state spread cpi inflat two metropolitan area lowest highest inflat rate slight lower around period euro area addit declin dispers inflat activ labour cost develop anoth key featur busi cycl converg output gap fluctuat becom similar across countri featur appar unit state dispers cycl trend gdp growth seem explain rough equal part growth dispers state instanc last year acceler activ rebound euro area real gdp growth wide share phenomenon across various euro area member countri henc regist growth dispers across euro area countri seem main explain differ trend output growth rather cyclic develop featur would like reflect differ trend output growth euro area might reveal structur factor normal featur monetari union differ trend output growth may instanc reflect divers initi condit catchingup process countri exampl recent year per capita incom ireland risen level well euro area earli level well earli gdp per capita ireland repres averag becom first euro area countri last year level ireland euro area level moreov countri may experi equilibr adjust process follow shock divers stem factor also econom justifi need observ within currenc area environ high adjust capac diverg interpret desir equilibr mechan contribut sustain converg among euro area countri howev case persist macroeconom differenti may reflect inappropri nation polici structur ineffici rigid malfunct adjust mechan individu euro area countri differenti result factor may detriment dynam econom activ employ sourc macroeconom differenti policymak concern measur taken nation level order increas econom flexibl start monetari polici singl monetari polici uniform polici interest rate euro area countri cannot know direct influenc divers output growth inflat across euro area countri emphasis import countri reach sustain converg prescrib maastricht criteria particip euro area welldesign structur polici undertaken nation level implement enhanc flexibl product labour market therebi increas adjust capac economi reform aim enhanc product growth labour utilis maintain stabl macroeconomn condit context lisbon strategi fundament ambiti programm draw attent urgenc structur reform unit state crossstat labour higher could also consid role model europ speak audienc journalist busi execut well awar hard task confront convey messag benefici effect reform growth job creation context essenti understand communic medium longterm benefit structur reform signific reward initi invest encourag respons parti communic effort specif labour market econom flexibl promot remov institut barrier flexibl wage priceset mechan let stress social partner share respons ensur wage determin appropri take account product labour market condit industri sector region level jeopardis competit employ one also take account fact wage set public sector often serv role model privat sector addit earli retir polici signific negat impact labour suppli henc particip employ rate context wage set suffici wage differenti need improv employ opportun lessskil worker region sector high unemploy reform also need product market let stress import fulli complet singl market particular servic network industri deeper integr market would stimul price flexibl foster competit open product market requir exist barrier labour capit mobil within euro area remov greater crossbord competit integr market across euro area countri would contribut lower price area europ may find interest benchmark unit state reform could also enhanc adjust process individu countri event asymmetr shock differ cyclic develop nation author make substanti contribut implement sound structur polici also ensur proper function adjust mechan within euro area implement welldesign fiscal polici would like repeat best contribut fiscal polici make proper function euro area sustain mediumterm orient fulli line orient provid stabil growth pact moreov fiscal polici also focus increas effect effici public sector high qualiti expenditur tax polici larg ineffici public sector put brake econom activ impos high tax burden economi channel resourc unproduct use speak germani mention germani exemplari contain overal public spend proport gdp last year despit mani challeng difficult environ commiss estim public spend repres gdp percentag point less hope convinc monetari author unit state euro area face challeng similar intern divers larg area magnitud although possibl natur extern region count larg extern sector signific bilater linkag similar experi natur call close work relat interact becom particular intens sinc advent euro set european central bank eurosystem time build longstand histori central bank multilater cooper various intern institut fora includ bank intern settlement sinc intern monetari fund sinc mid g sinc g sinc mid recent financi stabil forum group twenti intern organis provid excel opportun feder reserv chairman member board well staff fed ecbeurosystem meet regular give idea level contact say ben meet g g g imf bis meet probabl littl month averag addit mr bernank joint particip number intern confer inde regular meet ben built close work relationship climat mutual trust platform direct quick contact special circumst would requir urgent communic import purpos contact coordin monetari polici would incompat orient polici toward respect domest object rather benefit close contact lie indepth exchang inform view recent econom develop monetari financi econom outlook respect economi polici challeng ahead includ discuss trade financi linkag two economi direct via economi share firsthand knowledg world outlook see respect domest economi influenc influenc global outlook extrem import today globalis economi rare occas past close work relationship also permit work swift action prime exampl decis ecb took afternoon day terrorist attack septemb second exampl decis took help stabilis money market condit financi market turmoil last summer close contact fed prove extrem use share inform financi condit central bank action respect economi close contact chairman see tip iceberg two institut collabor close possibl level involv board member manag staff across various domain central bank set joint platform regular exchang inform field econom research set intern research forum monetari polici discuss theoret empir aspect monetari polici far four confer organis fifth one schedul june area payment settlement system infrastructur organis number joint confer instanc april central counterparti clear well regular meet feder reserv board even area educ undertaken joint work exampl confer role central bank econom person financ educ poland organis narodowi bank polski feder reserv bank new york ecb tie also facilit geograph proxim may surpris hear mention geograph proxim given centr eurosystem feder reserv system frankfurt washington respect howev ecb maintain perman repres offic imf street away feder reserv board washington though liaison feder reserv main raison d être offic anoth channel closer contact interact staff member two central bank also particip regular confer organis institut instanc far ten staff member ecb feder reserv board feder reserv district bank present research work seminar confer organis one institut staff member also regular visit central bank spend sever day discuss research work technic issu occas stay even run sever month sinc six ecb staff member spent total month feder reserv board district bank part ecb extern work experi programm mention mani mani relationship establish nation central bank eurosystem feder reserv system ladi gentlemen allow conclud euro area unit state larg econom bloc time larg open world market last decad particular wit tighten trade financi linkag bilater relationship unit state euro area reinforc result central bank worldwid particular feder reserv eurosystem alway keep eye partner econom monetari financi develop ecb feder reserv system mani opportun share experi technic expertis whether discuss within intern meet inform way confer staff visit person contact natur includ confid person relationship level chairmen would also like point one exampl cooper might look unusu last year one case cooper domain cultur art feder reserv exhibit remark set art work collect premis ecb frankfurt art exhibit anoth symbol illustr close crossatlant tie tonight journalist prize ceremoni also play part alway convinc strong relationship side atlant essenti stabil continu prosper respect contin also continu stabil prosper global economi today particular true period immens opportun signific challeng thank much attent bayoumi swiston foreign entangl estim sourc size spillov across industri countri imf work paper calza dées euro area global economi sensit intern environ influenc global econom develop di mauro anderton ed extern dimens euro area assess linkag cambridg cambridg univers press di mauro f l v smith dées m h pesaran explor intern linkag euro area global var analysi journal appli econometr vol page cpis data imf reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en