Yves Mersch: Capital markets union – the “Why” and the “How”,22-10-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,3016,"<p>Dear Mr Tănăsescu [Mihai Tănăsescu, Board Member of the EIB],Ladies and Gentlemen,In four days’ time, the European Central Bank (ECB) will disclose the results of its comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance sheets – what we have called a financial health check. This will mark the end of a tremendous effort by both banks and supervisors. Around 6,000 experts have been working full-time over the past twelve months to review the balance sheets of 130 banks in the euro area and Lithuania. Together, these banks represent roughly 85% of total bank assets in the euro area. One reason you are here tonight may be not only the dinner but also that you would like me to let you in on the secret of the numbers we will publish at noon on Sunday. I am afraid I have to keep you on the edge of your seats for four more days. Before we can disclose the outcome, we have to give banks the opportunity to review their results and prepare for publication. That review period will start tomorrow.What we already know is that the banks that will fall under our direct supervision have strengthened their balance sheets by almost €203bn since the summer of 2013. This includes €59.8bn of gross equity issuance, €31.6bn issuance of contingent convertible bonds (CoCos), €26bn of retained earnings, €18.3bn of asset sales, €17.6bn of one-off items and additional provisioning and about €50bn of other measures.These numbers show that even before the results are announced, the comprehensive assessment is delivering on its objective of repairing and strengthening banks’ balance sheets as the ECB takes on its new supervisory responsibilities.But tonight, I would like to look beyond Sunday to the bigger picture surrounding the comprehensive assessment. What some perceive as a burdensome exercise, analysing very technical aspects of bank balance sheets, is in reality a display of the ambition to create a more integrated financial market in Europe. The comprehensive assessment is an important prerequisite and foundation for the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), which will start operating on 4 November. Together, they constitute a sea change in Europe’s banking markets. For the first time, common legislation and rules will be applied by a single authority, strongly increasing transparency and banks’ comparability across countries. But we must recognise that we have not reached the end of the journey. A single supervisor can more easily ensure comparability where there are single rules. Remember the discussion about the different national definitions of non-performing loans in the context of the asset quality review. This is a telling example that the singleness of Europe’s financial market is still challenged by piecemeal national rules and standards.In addition to banking supervision, there is a second area where fragmentation of Europe’s financial market remains a stumbling block. Seven years after the first shock waves of the financial crisis and two years after the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area, economic recovery is still some way off: euro area real GDP remained unchanged between the first and second quarters of this year. Unemployment is still at 11.5%. Prices in September rose by only 0.3% – and measures of inflation expectations have gone down.To restart growth, we must open financing channels, especially for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). And this can best happen when financial markets are fully integrated.In the light of these various concerns, the aspiration to complete the single financial market has returned to the top of the agenda – and quite rightly so. The latest focus for this discussion is the creation of a European capital markets union.Expectations for the project of a capital markets union are high. But to date, there is no common understanding of what it means or what it should look like. For the financial industry, it means new business opportunities; for financial stability experts, it means better control of shadow banking; and for entrepreneurs, it means better access to funding sources. As central banker, I would stress another major advantage of more integrated financial markets in the euro area: it would greatly facilitate the implementation of the ECB’s monetary policy.We are clearly at the beginning of the discussion of a capital markets union. But l believe that a broad public discussion is exactly what we need to generate ideas and start the opinion-forming process. I therefore welcome the fact that Lord Hill has announced his intention to consult a broad range of stakeholders and conduct analyses before presenting more concrete proposals. I too do not have a ready-made blueprint in my bottom drawer. It is time to spell out more clearly what we want and what we do not need, what we can achieve and what we should not attempt. This way we can prevent the capital markets union from becoming a ‘Jack of all trades, master of none’. In my view, the various motivations for a capital markets union can be summarised under two main objectives:On the one hand, we need to find ways to generate growth. In a way, the euro area economy is like a plane flying on only one engine: bank financing. To increase the speed and stability of the plane, it would be good to add a second engine: capital market financing. Hence, we must seek to deepen capital markets so that they can play a more important role in supporting the real economy. And we must name areas where removing frictions between national markets can bring new business.On the other hand, we need to ensure financial stability in the longer term. An impressive amount of regulation has been introduced since the crisis began, tackling several fundamental problems in our regulatory set-up. Indeed, the crisis showed that our initial rules were in some areas too lax and too heterogeneous across countries to ensure the stability and singleness of Europe’s financial market. At the same time, we should avoid excesses: more regulation does not always mean more stability.In many instances, the two objectives of growth and financial stability complement each other. I believe that greater integration of markets can be key to both. Fifteen years after the financial services action plan, it is time for another big step forward for Europe’s single financial market.So what measures do we need to take to achieve these objectives? To my mind, a comprehensive capital markets union requires thinking along three dimensions.The first is the opening of the market itself: in this regard, we have already achieved a great deal within the EU. The second is the introduction of common regulatory standards. And the third consists of the institutional structures that enforce these regulatory standards.I will elaborate on the second dimension and also make some remarks on the third dimension.Let me first address the regulatory dimension. Financial markets are complex systems with many different players, products, infrastructures and currencies. As a consequence, financial markets are at the intersection of many different fields of legal rules, including contract law, corporate governance, capital requirements, insolvency, taxation and consumer protection.To ensure that a single financial market delivers growth and stability, all of these fields need to be taken into account. Let me illustrate this for the financial market segment that is the focus of this high-level workshop. To revive the securitisation market and to ensure its stability, there are three regulatory fields where I believe that action is necessary: ABS regulation; insolvency law; and payment and settlement systems. Let me discuss each in turn. The first key challenge for the securitisation market is the lack of standardisation at the European level and the heavy capital charges for an asset class that have been set internationally. Take the ABS market, which we have been looking closely at for some time. We believe that it could be an important channel for increased lending to SMEs.Because of their size, SMEs generally cannot issue bonds. In addition, the risk of non-payment and the low liquidity of loans to SMEs in difficult times are major hurdles for SMEs to get financing, even through the banking channel. In this regard, securitisation can help to connect SME financing needs with the funds of bank and non-bank investors. It can do so by assisting banks’ ability to fund and distribute risk. Here we believe that having a consistent approach to securitisation underpinning various pieces of legislation is key to attracting a broader investor base and to de-stigmatising European securitisations. Let me say clearly: no one wants to have the complex, opaque products of the pre-crisis years. Repackaging the umpteenth tranche of a financial derivative should be a thing of the past. But the regulatory framework should be appropriate for the actual risk. And in this respect there are significant differences between current and previous securitisations and between the US and European experiences.Since the start of the crisis, the default rates of European ABS were on average between 0.6% and 1.5%. In the US over the same period, they were on average 9.3% to 18.4%. European SME ABS are even further below these default rates, at about 0.1%. It makes little sense to calibrate the international rules solely on the basis of US experiences. It would be like calibrating the price of flood insurance for Madrid on the experience of New Orleans.The current rules lump all ABS together and are much too conservative. They effectively question their existence. Under the current regulatory conditions, simple, transparent ABS built on real assets face almost as many constraints as much more complex financial products. The ECB has therefore, in cooperation with the Bank of England, made a number of proposals for a better functioning European securitisation market. We have received positive responses from the Commission and the Member States. The proposals are derived in part from the quality and transparency requirements that central banks place on ABS, which can be deposited as collateral in monetary policy operations. And as a central bank, our demands have always been very high.Let me add, that in this regard, the ABS market is a good example of how a capital markets union can also benefit our monetary policy, besides generating growth and promoting financial stability.The second regulatory obstacle for a single market for securitised products is the heterogeneity of insolvency rules across the EU. This applies to both financial and non-financial companies. The Council Regulation on cross-border insolvency proceedings establishes a common framework of basic rules regarding the competent courts, the applicable law and the recognition of court decisions. But within this framework, national laws differ substantially in how far they protect the different stakeholders in insolvency.For example, the rights of preferential creditors differ substantially in some cases. Different prescriptions on the filing and verification of claims can also cause frictions. Heterogeneity becomes all the more important in dealing with the insolvency of multi-national enterprise groups. All in all, the heterogeneity of insolvency rules complicates the creation of homogenous asset pools and therefore the securitisation process. The Commission proposal to review the Regulation on cross-border insolvency makes suggestions how to improve this situation in the right direction. The third regulatory challenge for the securitisation market is the field of payment systems and securities settlement. Despite much progress over the past decade, securities settlement in the euro area remains fragmented, inefficient and not very customer-friendly. This is not just a problem for smaller businesses, for which adapting to different conditions in the Member States often entails high costs, but also for the integration and functioning of the single market as a whole. A striking comparison is often made with the US, an economic area of comparable size: settling a cross-border securities transaction in Europe has been estimated to cost at least ten times as much as in the US!This issue can be solved by establishing European market infrastructures for the processing of securities transactions, as well as a coordinated and more harmonised monitoring of critical market infrastructures. In all these areas, in which the Eurosystem is competent, relevant initiatives were launched several years ago and have already made significant progress.For example, Target2Securities is the Eurosystem’s response to the high fragmentation that characterises the infrastructure supporting capital markets in Europe. T2S will be a new IT platform performing the real-time settlement of securities transactions against central bank money across European borders. T2S will settle all securities, both debt securities and equities. The T2S platform is now fully developed. This year is reserved for testing and it is set to go live in June 2015. This will be a major event with a strong impact on the financial services industry in Europe.All of this applies fully to ABS markets. Their settlement infrastructure will become more integrated and overcome obstacles that have so far hindered cross-border trade. The standardisation of ABS, further harmonisation of insolvency laws and the integration of settlement systems are three illustrations from the securitisation market showing how the regulatory dimension of a capital markets union can achieve progress by accelerating existing initiatives and launching additional ones.More generally, the regulatory dimension implies both a deepening and broadening of the single rulebook. Deepening means that prudential rules should converge further where undue carve outs remain. Broadening means that the single rulebook should be expanded to other areas that affect the single financial market.Beyond the regulatory dimension of a capital markets union, there are a number of institutional questions related to consistency across market segments, multi-level governance, actors and geographical scope.As regards consistency, we need to ask ourselves: how much integration do we need beyond the banking system? If banking supervision is becoming European, can payment systems continue to be monitored nationally? What about new technologies? Do we wait until they are established in the old national frameworks before we try to negotiate mutual acceptance, or harmonisation, or should we foster creativity and efficiency by offering from the outset a Europe-wide single framework?As regards multi-level governance, we must identify the areas in which the EU can take the initiative and those in which the Member States can be active. Can we rely on directives with national leeway in their implementation or do we need to make use of Regulations that are directly applicable?As regards actors, there is the question of where we should rely on decentralised application of common rules and where we need institutions at EU level to implement common rules? What functions could be performed, for example, by the European supervisory authorities, whose activities and tasks are currently being reviewed in Brussels? As regards geographical scope, it is important that we strive to make the capital markets union a project of the EU28 to reinforce the single financial market as a whole. Nevertheless, it is clear that the euro area has a particular interest in increased financial integration to pave the road towards a genuine monetary and economic union.Let me conclude. Some may argue that the capital markets union is old wine in new bottles. I disagree. What is old are the problems that we need to overcome. But for that we need new measures that we have not previously been able to implement – either because of a lack of political will or because of an insufficiently clear plan on how to implement them. Art. 114 of the TFEU gives a clear mandate for this purpose.The capital markets union is not so much about a couple of high-profile actions but more about a larger series of less visible initiatives. And that is why we need the capital markets union as connector and label. To operate with this term will help to raise awareness, to define overall objectives, to prioritise resources and to ensure consistency of the individual measures. Ladies and gentlemen, The overall situation of the European economy makes it abundantly clear that we cannot wait for a miracle to end a period of low growth. We are not out of the danger zone. The patient is still fragile and unfortunately relapses cannot be ruled out.As I have explained, a capital markets union can provide very important impulses for both economic recovery and financial stability. I am aware that some of the proposals are ambitious and cannot be implemented overnight. But the fact that the incoming President of the European Commission has already taken up the idea makes me optimistic. The challenge in the coming months will be to create greater political awareness of the enormous importance of this highly technical area for Europe’s economy.At the same time, I want to point out that a capital markets union cannot be our only area of action. Financial policy, fiscal policy and economic policy are all equally important to keep the recovery on track. Governance of the euro area can be thought of like the gearbox of a car. The cogs do not all need to be of equal size but they all need to be moving in the same direction. If only one cog starts going the wrong way, the whole car grinds to a halt. Non-respect of agreed rules by some is clearly establishing moral hazard risks for the actions of others.Many things in the euro area need to come together to create an environment in which businesses and entrepreneurs can generate added value. Ernest Solvay, after whom the library in which the workshop will take place tomorrow is named, provides us with a good example. In the early 1860s, he had a brilliant idea for the industrial production of sodium carbonate. But it took the perseverance of several financiers and ten years before the process was ready to be used on an industrial scale. And Solvay relied on a patent to protect the intellectual property that ultimately formed the basis of his corporate success. Over 150 years later, a capital markets union can help the Ernest Solvays of today. It can enable all Europe’s entrepreneurs to obtain the financing they need to turn their innovative ideas into successful businesses that will create jobs and promote sustained prosperity.Thank you for your attention.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",dear mr tănăsescu mihai tănăsescu board member eib ladi gentlemen four day time european central bank ecb disclos result comprehens assess bank balanc sheet call financi health check mark end tremend effort bank supervisor around expert work fulltim past twelv month review balanc sheet bank euro area lithuania togeth bank repres rough total bank asset euro area one reason tonight may dinner also would like let secret number publish noon sunday afraid keep edg seat four day disclos outcom give bank opportun review result prepar public review period start tomorrow alreadi know bank fall direct supervis strengthen balanc sheet almost bn sinc summer includ bn gross equiti issuanc bn issuanc conting convert bond coco bn retain earn bn asset sale bn oneoff item addit provis bn measur number show even result announc comprehens assess deliv object repair strengthen bank balanc sheet ecb take new supervisori respons tonight would like look beyond sunday bigger pictur surround comprehens assess perceiv burdensom exercis analys technic aspect bank balanc sheet realiti display ambit creat integr financi market europ comprehens assess import prerequisit foundat singl supervisori mechan ssm start oper novemb togeth constitut sea chang europ bank market first time common legisl rule appli singl author strong increas transpar bank compar across countri must recognis reach end journey singl supervisor easili ensur compar singl rule rememb discuss differ nation definit nonperform loan context asset qualiti review tell exampl singl europ financi market still challeng piecem nation rule standard addit bank supervis second area fragment europ financi market remain stumbl block seven year first shock wave financi crisi two year sovereign debt crisi euro area econom recoveri still way euro area real gdp remain unchang first second quarter year unemploy still price septemb rose measur inflat expect gone restart growth must open financ channel especi small mediums enterpris smes best happen financi market fulli integr light various concern aspir complet singl financi market return top agenda quit right latest focus discuss creation european capit market union expect project capit market union high date common understand mean look like financi industri mean new busi opportun financi stabil expert mean better control shadow bank entrepreneur mean better access fund sourc central banker would stress anoth major advantag integr financi market euro area would great facilit implement ecb monetari polici clear begin discuss capit market union l believ broad public discuss exact need generat idea start opinionform process therefor welcom fact lord hill announc intent consult broad rang stakehold conduct analys present concret propos readymad blueprint bottom drawer time spell clear want need achiev attempt way prevent capit market union becom jack trade master none view various motiv capit market union summaris two main object one hand need find way generat growth way euro area economi like plane fli one engin bank financ increas speed stabil plane would good add second engin capit market financ henc must seek deepen capit market play import role support real economi must name area remov friction nation market bring new busi hand need ensur financi stabil longer term impress amount regul introduc sinc crisi began tackl sever fundament problem regulatori setup inde crisi show initi rule area lax heterogen across countri ensur stabil singl europ financi market time avoid excess regul alway mean stabil mani instanc two object growth financi stabil complement believ greater integr market key fifteen year financi servic action plan time anoth big step forward europ singl financi market measur need take achiev object mind comprehens capit market union requir think along three dimens first open market regard alreadi achiev great deal within eu second introduct common regulatori standard third consist institut structur enforc regulatori standard elabor second dimens also make remark third dimens let first address regulatori dimens financi market complex system mani differ player product infrastructur currenc consequ financi market intersect mani differ field legal rule includ contract law corpor govern capit requir insolv taxat consum protect ensur singl financi market deliv growth stabil field need taken account let illustr financi market segment focus highlevel workshop reviv securitis market ensur stabil three regulatori field believ action necessari ab regul insolv law payment settlement system let discuss turn first key challeng securitis market lack standardis european level heavi capit charg asset class set intern take ab market look close time believ could import channel increas lend smes size smes general cannot issu bond addit risk nonpay low liquid loan smes difficult time major hurdl smes get financ even bank channel regard securitis help connect sme financ need fund bank nonbank investor assist bank abil fund distribut risk believ consist approach securitis underpin various piec legisl key attract broader investor base destigmatis european securitis let say clear one want complex opaqu product precrisi year repackag umpteenth tranch financi deriv thing past regulatori framework appropri actual risk respect signific differ current previous securitis us european experi sinc start crisi default rate european ab averag us period averag european sme ab even default rate make littl sens calibr intern rule sole basi us experi would like calibr price flood insur madrid experi new orlean current rule lump ab togeth much conserv effect question exist current regulatori condit simpl transpar ab built real asset face almost mani constraint much complex financi product ecb therefor cooper bank england made number propos better function european securitis market receiv posit respons commiss member state propos deriv part qualiti transpar requir central bank place ab deposit collater monetari polici oper central bank demand alway high let add regard ab market good exampl capit market union also benefit monetari polici besid generat growth promot financi stabil second regulatori obstacl singl market securitis product heterogen insolv rule across eu appli financi nonfinanci compani council regul crossbord insolv proceed establish common framework basic rule regard compet court applic law recognit court decis within framework nation law differ substanti far protect differ stakehold insolv exampl right preferenti creditor differ substanti case differ prescript file verif claim also caus friction heterogen becom import deal insolv multin enterpris group heterogen insolv rule complic creation homogen asset pool therefor securitis process commiss propos review regul crossbord insolv make suggest improv situat right direct third regulatori challeng securitis market field payment system secur settlement despit much progress past decad secur settlement euro area remain fragment ineffici customerfriend problem smaller busi adapt differ condit member state often entail high cost also integr function singl market whole strike comparison often made us econom area compar size settl crossbord secur transact europ estim cost least ten time much us issu solv establish european market infrastructur process secur transact well coordin harmonis monitor critic market infrastructur area eurosystem compet relev initi launch sever year ago alreadi made signific progress exampl target secur eurosystem respons high fragment characteris infrastructur support capit market europ new platform perform realtim settlement secur transact central bank money across european border settl secur debt secur equiti platform fulli develop year reserv test set go live june major event strong impact financi servic industri europ appli fulli ab market settlement infrastructur becom integr overcom obstacl far hinder crossbord trade standardis ab harmonis insolv law integr settlement system three illustr securitis market show regulatori dimens capit market union achiev progress acceler exist initi launch addit one general regulatori dimens impli deepen broaden singl rulebook deepen mean prudenti rule converg undu carv out remain broaden mean singl rulebook expand area affect singl financi market beyond regulatori dimens capit market union number institut question relat consist across market segment multilevel govern actor geograph scope regard consist need ask much integr need beyond bank system bank supervis becom european payment system continu monitor nation new technolog wait establish old nation framework tri negoti mutual accept harmonis foster creativ effici offer outset europewid singl framework regard multilevel govern must identifi area eu take initi member state activ reli direct nation leeway implement need make use regul direct applic regard actor question reli decentralis applic common rule need institut eu level implement common rule function could perform exampl european supervisori author whose activ task current review brussel regard geograph scope import strive make capit market union project eu reinforc singl financi market whole nevertheless clear euro area particular interest increas financi integr pave road toward genuin monetari econom union let conclud may argu capit market union old wine new bottl disagre old problem need overcom need new measur previous abl implement either lack polit insuffici clear plan implement art tfeu give clear mandat purpos capit market union much coupl highprofil action larger seri less visibl initi need capit market union connector label oper term help rais awar defin overal object prioritis resourc ensur consist individu measur ladi gentlemen overal situat european economi make abund clear cannot wait miracl end period low growth danger zone patient still fragil unfortun relaps cannot rule explain capit market union provid import impuls econom recoveri financi stabil awar propos ambiti cannot implement overnight fact incom presid european commiss alreadi taken idea make optimist challeng come month creat greater polit awar enorm import high technic area europ economi time want point capit market union cannot area action financi polici fiscal polici econom polici equal import keep recoveri track govern euro area thought like gearbox car cog need equal size need move direct one cog start go wrong way whole car grind halt nonrespect agre rule clear establish moral hazard risk action other mani thing euro area need come togeth creat environ busi entrepreneur generat ad valu ernest solvay librari workshop take place tomorrow name provid us good exampl earli brilliant idea industri product sodium carbon took persever sever financi ten year process readi use industri scale solvay reli patent protect intellectu properti ultim form basi corpor success year later capit market union help ernest solvay today enabl europ entrepreneur obtain financ need turn innov idea success busi creat job promot sustain prosper thank attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en