Jean-Claude Trichet: The ECB’s response to the recent tensions in financial markets,31-05-2010,European Central Bank,ECB,2640,"<p>Meine sehr verehrten Damen und Herren,ich danke den Veranstaltern dieser Konferenz recht herzlich für die Einladung zur 38. Volkswirtschaftlichen Tagung der Oesterreichischen Nationalbank. I would like to use the occasion of today’s conference to recall how the European Central Bank has reacted to the crisis and, in particular, put our most recent actions into this context. As I am sure you all appreciate, there is a single thread running through all of these actions, namely to ensure that we deliver on what we are expected to deliver: price stability across the euro area over the medium term. To those observers who have recently asked whether we have changed our orientation, I can only assure them that, on the contrary, it is the circumstances that have demanded special actions, and our orientation remains the same. As we all know, these are challenging times for Europe and for the ECB. We are confronted with tensions in financial markets, a difficult fiscal situation in some parts of the euro area and an associated adverse impact on the effective functioning of monetary policy. The current tensions are the most recent repercussions of the financial crisis of 2007 and 2008, which culminated by the failure of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. After that, we saw a sharp fall in global economic activity, hitting the euro area and other advanced economies hard. In the fourth quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009, global trade volumes fell by 18 percent, the GDP of the euro area fell by altogether almost 4.5 percent and unemployment rose by 1.4 percentage points in just six months. The ECB acted quickly and decisively in response to these circumstances. We reduced our key interest rates to unprecedented low levels and introduced a series of non-standard measures to support credit provision by banks to the euro area economy. This was essential at a time when the financial crisis had led to a virtual “free fall” in economic activity and severe problems in the money market were hampering the transmission of lower key ECB interest rates to money market and bank lending rates. Our non-standard measures, which we refer to as “enhanced credit support”, aimed to sustain financing conditions and credit flows above and beyond what could be achieved through reductions in key ECB interest rates alone. They included lengthening of the maximum maturity of refinancing operations, extension of the eligible collateral list, provision of liquidity in foreign currencies, covered bond purchases, and, above all, provision of unlimited liquidity in all refinancing operations at a fixed rate. Enhanced credit support fostered a considerable improvement in market liquidity and helped to alleviate funding risks. The measures also protected us against any possible deflationary situation and helped focus on medium-term price stability.Earlier this month, at a time when we had already exited from some of our enhanced credit support measures, we were suddenly faced with renewed market tensions. This time, they erupted in a number of segments of the euro area’s debt securities markets. After very careful consideration of all implications of acting, as well as of those of not acting, we decided to intervene in these markets starting on 10 May by launching our Securities Markets Programme. Along with cuts in our interest rates back in 2008 and early 2009, and measures of enhanced credit support, this programme constitutes the third element of our response to the financial crisis. In my remarks today, I would like to give you some further details about this third element: why we have introduced it, how it is designed to operate and why it is in line with the key principles of our monetary policy-making. And I would like to place our actions in the context of the broader challenges for economic policy-makers and private sector decision-makers, in our collective pursuit of return to financial stability and ensuring a sustainable economic recovery.Like all other non-standard measures we have taken, the Securities Markets Programme is time-bound in nature. It aims to ensure the proper transmission of monetary policy impulses to the wider economy and, ultimately, to the general price level. To achieve our primary goal of ensuring price stability, monetary policy-making needs to be effective. In this respect, well-functioning securities markets are indispensable.Let me briefly describe why this is the case. We implement monetary policy by setting our key policy rates. Through this, we directly influence short-term interest rates in the money market. Financial markets transmit this impulse along the maturity spectrum, since term rates reflect current and expected future short-term rates as well as risk premia. These rates, in turn, affect the costs of funding for households, for firms, and for governments. The resulting financing conditions affect economic activity and, in the end, prices. The functioning of the market for government bonds is central to the transmission of the ECB’s policy rates. This is because of several channels.Via the price channel, interest rates on government bonds influence financing conditions within the economy. For example, they are often used as a reference rate when a bank prices a loan for a customer, or when a company borrows money by issuing a bond. Sovereign financing conditions, under normally functioning bond markets, often provide a floor for the funding conditions of the private sector.Interest rates on government bonds always include add-ons to compensate for liquidity risk and credit risk. But these risk premia should not become so large that they dominate the signal from the key policy rates to a point where it is no longer distinguishable and does not reach the real economy. This can happen when markets no longer function properly. Closely related is the liquidity channel, which comes into play at the start of the transmission mechanism, influencing short-term interest rates beyond the conditions set by policy rates. Government bonds are often used as collateral for banks’ refinancing operations. In fact, government bonds are the primary collateral used in the secured interbank market. If government bond markets are disrupted, this hampers the functioning of the interbank market and reduces liquidity in this market. The consequences are increased money market rates due to premia for liquidity risk. As a result, the capacity of banks to issue loans and refinance the real economy suffers. A third channel, the balance sheet channel , is indirect: lower government bond prices, which correspond to higher bond yields, imply valuation losses in the assets held by the financial and non-financial sectors. For banks, the lower capital base may mean that they can supply fewer loans to the economy. For borrowers, their creditworthiness is reduced, and this affects their capacity to borrow.Because of these channels, severe tensions in the bond market hamper the monetary policy transmission mechanism. The relation between our key interest rates and the rates applicable in the real economy gets out of order, and our main tool for influencing refinancing conditions in the real economy does not work the way it should.This is the situation that threatened us at the beginning of this month, so we saw the need to act quickly to re-establish a more normal functioning of our monetary policy transmission mechanism. The very rapid consolidation of that situation depends crucially on the effective implementation of the fiscal retrenchment programmes that have been decided in a number of countries. Let me now explain how the Securities Markets Programme works. The programme consists of interventions in the euro area’s public and private debt securities markets. In order to sterilise the impact of these interventions on the liquidity conditions in the banking system, we re-absorb the liquidity injected. Thus, these measures do not influence our monetary policy stance.More specifically, the programme focuses on these securities markets that have been affected by severe disruptions recently. These tensions did not come out of the blue. The sky had darkened since the end of last year, when difficulties with public finances in some euro area countries came into the focus of financial market participants. Following prolonged discussions about the possibility of a loan support facility for Greece, tensions rose further towards the end of April and the beginning of May. On 6 and 7 May, on Thursday afternoon and throughout Friday, we observed a further deterioration in financial market conditions, both in Europe and, as a consequence, at the global level. On Friday 7 May, spreads on sovereign bonds in Europe, CDS spreads and indices of volatility and stress in the interbank market were signalling the spreading of severe tensions. Bond spreads for several euro area countries widened beyond any reasonable level. Liquidity in government bond markets of some euro area countries almost dried up. And the tensions in the sovereign bond markets spilled over to other market segments, such as the foreign exchange market and equity markets, where trading volumes and liquidity became erratic, and volatility spiked.In view of these exceptional circumstances prevailing in the financial markets, we decided that exceptional intervention was necessary. As always, our actions have been guided by our principles. In this respect, let me focus on three aspects that are key for the credible conduct of monetary policy: price stability, central bank independence and the prohibition of monetary financing.  First, price stability, which is our primary objective. The latest measures address a malfunctioning of certain market segments. Without such measures, the market problems could have created risks to the favourable outlook for price stability. However, we have not gone beyond the goal of re-establishing a more correct transmission of our monetary policy. We have not changed our monetary policy stance: we have maintained the present level of interest rates which is, in our view, appropriate; and we have not embarked on more ample liquidity conditions.Precisely in order to guarantee that the stance remains unaffected, we sterilise our interventions, as I have explained. The Securities Markets Programme should not be confused with quantitative easing. In simple words: We are not printing money. This confirms and underpins our commitment to price stability. Credibility is crucial for ensuring price stability. As long as inflation expectations remain well-anchored in line with our definition of price stability, long-term interest rates do not need to reflect the risks stemming from an uncertain inflationary process. In an environment in which the central bank fully preserves its credibility, economic agents do not need to try to anticipate uncertain inflationary developments, thus potentially fuelling inflationary pressures. In this respect, let me highlight that inflation expectations in the euro area have remained well-anchored in line with the Governing Council’s definition of price stability throughout the financial crisis. This is evidenced by a range of indicators. For example, in the Survey of Professional Forecasters, inflation five years ahead is continuously expected to stand either at 1.9% or 2.0% since the beginning of 2002. A second key principle guiding our action is central bank independence. We were fully independent in our decision to act as we have done. We have never hesitated to take the decisions needed to ensure price stability. And we will continue to act accordingly. Let me recall that in December 2005, we increased rates against the publicly expressed sentiment of the governments. In 2008 we did not hesitate to raise interest rates, even in a period of financial turbulence. We took this decision to prevent broadly based second-round effects at that time, with a view to counteracting increasing upside risks to price stability over the medium term.We always act fully in line with our own responsibilities. And that is the reason why we have been delivering price stability. Third, our actions are in full compliance with the prohibition of monetary financing and thus with our financial independence. The Treaty prohibits the direct purchase by the ECB of debt instruments from governments. We are buying bonds on the secondary market only, and we stick to the principles of the Treaty, which are price stability, our primary mandate, and central bank independence. Since our inception, we have always called upon governments to respect budgetary discipline. We had a lot of difficulty with several governments during the last ten years, both as regards their own national responsibilities and as regards their collegial responsibilities of peer surveillance in the Eurogroup. This period is over. We expect from governments strict respect for the principle of budgetary discipline and effective mutual surveillance. The purchases made on the secondary market cannot be used to circumvent the fundamental principle of budgetary discipline. The Securities Markets Programme strictly aims at correcting malfunctioning of markets.The prohibition of monetary financing underlines precisely the fact that budgetary discipline is of the utmost importance. We have taken note of the commitments of euro area governments to take all measures needed to meet their fiscal targets. We have also taken note of the precise additional commitments taken by some euro area governments to accelerate fiscal consolidation and to ensure the sustainability of their public finances. It is crucial that governments implement rigorously the measures needed to ensure fiscal sustainability. It is in the context of these commitments only that we have embarked on an intervention programme in the securities markets.The Securities Market Programme is an extraordinary action, which was undertaken in the situation of severe tensions in financial markets. I would like to stress that the rigorous application of the adjustment programmes by governments is essential to guarantee the progressive return to a more normal functioning of financial markets. Let me conclude. Recent experience, since 2007, has demonstrated how important it is for all decision-makers to analyse lucidly the unexpected situations that they are facing and to act in a timely manner when needed. As soon as it became clear that the intensity of recent market disruptions could have implied very serious consequences for price stability in the euro area, we took firm action. As I have said time and again: we are permanently alert and always prepared to act when necessary.Price stability is the central contribution, which monetary policy makes to economic growth, to job creation and to financial stability. Our successful track record since the inception of the euro – both in terms of low inflation rates and well-anchored inflation expectations – is remarkable. Since the inception of the euro, more than 11 years ago until April this year, the average annual inflation in the euro area was 1.98%. This is exactly in line with our definition of price stability and it is better than the achievement of any major central bank over a period of many decades, including the Bundesbank. But the ECB’s measures cannot substitute for the actions required to address more deep-seated and fundamental problems. It remains for others – national governments, regulators and supervisors, and the private sector and financial industry – to proceed with the difficult, but vital, measures required to re-establish the trust on which a well-functioning market economy relies.Cohesive action at a European level is essential to alleviate the current tensions. Such action will also support a sound, longer-term economic recovery in the euro area and beyond. This will benefit all of us who live and work in Europe.I call on euro area governments to work together. Looking ahead, countries have to take up their responsibilities. Major improvements need to be made to prevent bad fiscal behaviour, ensure effective implementation of the recommendations made by partners and enforce real and effective sanctions in case of breaches. It is equally decisive for the European Commission and the Eurogroup to engage in an effective control of the evolution of relative competitiveness inside the euro area, including of the evolution of unit labour costs. And the implementation of structural reforms, under the surveillance of the peers, is of the essence to elevate the growth potential in Europe. I call on euro area governments in particular to work actively together to reach agreement on a quantum leap of the effectiveness of their collegial surveillance. Thank you for your attention. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",mein sehr verehrten damen und herren ich dank den veranstaltern dieser konferenz recht herzlich für die einladung zur volkswirtschaftlichen tagung der oesterreichischen nationalbank would like use occas today confer recal european central bank react crisi particular put recent action context sure appreci singl thread run action name ensur deliv expect deliv price stabil across euro area medium term observ recent ask whether chang orient assur contrari circumst demand special action orient remain know challeng time europ ecb confront tension financi market difficult fiscal situat part euro area associ advers impact effect function monetari polici current tension recent repercuss financi crisi culmin failur lehman brother septemb saw sharp fall global econom activ hit euro area advanc economi hard fourth quarter first quarter global trade volum fell percent gdp euro area fell altogeth almost percent unemploy rose percentag point six month ecb act quick decis respons circumst reduc key interest rate unpreced low level introduc seri nonstandard measur support credit provis bank euro area economi essenti time financi crisi led virtual free fall econom activ sever problem money market hamper transmiss lower key ecb interest rate money market bank lend rate nonstandard measur refer enhanc credit support aim sustain financ condit credit flow beyond could achiev reduct key ecb interest rate alon includ lengthen maximum matur refinanc oper extens elig collater list provis liquid foreign currenc cover bond purchas provis unlimit liquid refinanc oper fix rate enhanc credit support foster consider improv market liquid help allevi fund risk measur also protect us possibl deflationari situat help focus mediumterm price stabil earlier month time alreadi exit enhanc credit support measur sudden face renew market tension time erupt number segment euro area debt secur market care consider implic act well act decid interven market start may launch secur market programm along cut interest rate back earli measur enhanc credit support programm constitut third element respons financi crisi remark today would like give detail third element introduc design oper line key principl monetari policymak would like place action context broader challeng econom policymak privat sector decisionmak collect pursuit return financi stabil ensur sustain econom recoveri like nonstandard measur taken secur market programm timebound natur aim ensur proper transmiss monetari polici impuls wider economi ultim general price level achiev primari goal ensur price stabil monetari policymak need effect respect wellfunct secur market indispens let briefli describ case implement monetari polici set key polici rate direct influenc shortterm interest rate money market financi market transmit impuls along matur spectrum sinc term rate reflect current expect futur shortterm rate well risk premia rate turn affect cost fund household firm govern result financ condit affect econom activ end price function market govern bond central transmiss ecb polici rate sever channel via price channel interest rate govern bond influenc financ condit within economi exampl often use refer rate bank price loan custom compani borrow money issu bond sovereign financ condit normal function bond market often provid floor fund condit privat sector interest rate govern bond alway includ addon compens liquid risk credit risk risk premia becom larg domin signal key polici rate point longer distinguish reach real economi happen market longer function proper close relat liquid channel come play start transmiss mechan influenc shortterm interest rate beyond condit set polici rate govern bond often use collater bank refinanc oper fact govern bond primari collater use secur interbank market govern bond market disrupt hamper function interbank market reduc liquid market consequ increas money market rate due premia liquid risk result capac bank issu loan refin real economi suffer third channel balanc sheet channel indirect lower govern bond price correspond higher bond yield impli valuat loss asset held financi nonfinanci sector bank lower capit base may mean suppli fewer loan economi borrow creditworthi reduc affect capac borrow channel sever tension bond market hamper monetari polici transmiss mechan relat key interest rate rate applic real economi get order main tool influenc refinanc condit real economi work way situat threaten us begin month saw need act quick reestablish normal function monetari polici transmiss mechan rapid consolid situat depend crucial effect implement fiscal retrench programm decid number countri let explain secur market programm work programm consist intervent euro area public privat debt secur market order sterilis impact intervent liquid condit bank system reabsorb liquid inject thus measur influenc monetari polici stanc specif programm focus secur market affect sever disrupt recent tension come blue sky darken sinc end last year difficulti public financ euro area countri came focus financi market particip follow prolong discuss possibl loan support facil greec tension rose toward end april begin may may thursday afternoon throughout friday observ deterior financi market condit europ consequ global level friday may spread sovereign bond europ cds spread indic volatil stress interbank market signal spread sever tension bond spread sever euro area countri widen beyond reason level liquid govern bond market euro area countri almost dri tension sovereign bond market spill market segment foreign exchang market equiti market trade volum liquid becam errat volatil spike view except circumst prevail financi market decid except intervent necessari alway action guid principl respect let focus three aspect key credibl conduct monetari polici price stabil central bank independ prohibit monetari financ first price stabil primari object latest measur address malfunct certain market segment without measur market problem could creat risk favour outlook price stabil howev gone beyond goal reestablish correct transmiss monetari polici chang monetari polici stanc maintain present level interest rate view appropri embark ampl liquid condit precis order guarante stanc remain unaffect sterilis intervent explain secur market programm confus quantit eas simpl word print money confirm underpin commit price stabil credibl crucial ensur price stabil long inflat expect remain wellanchor line definit price stabil longterm interest rate need reflect risk stem uncertain inflationari process environ central bank fulli preserv credibl econom agent need tri anticip uncertain inflationari develop thus potenti fuell inflationari pressur respect let highlight inflat expect euro area remain wellanchor line govern council definit price stabil throughout financi crisi evidenc rang indic exampl survey profession forecast inflat five year ahead continu expect stand either sinc begin second key principl guid action central bank independ fulli independ decis act done never hesit take decis need ensur price stabil continu act accord let recal decemb increas rate public express sentiment govern hesit rais interest rate even period financi turbul took decis prevent broad base secondround effect time view counteract increas upsid risk price stabil medium term alway act fulli line respons reason deliv price stabil third action full complianc prohibit monetari financ thus financi independ treati prohibit direct purchas ecb debt instrument govern buy bond secondari market stick principl treati price stabil primari mandat central bank independ sinc incept alway call upon govern respect budgetari disciplin lot difficulti sever govern last ten year regard nation respons regard collegi respons peer surveil eurogroup period expect govern strict respect principl budgetari disciplin effect mutual surveil purchas made secondari market cannot use circumv fundament principl budgetari disciplin secur market programm strict aim correct malfunct market prohibit monetari financ underlin precis fact budgetari disciplin utmost import taken note commit euro area govern take measur need meet fiscal target also taken note precis addit commit taken euro area govern acceler fiscal consolid ensur sustain public financ crucial govern implement rigor measur need ensur fiscal sustain context commit embark intervent programm secur market secur market programm extraordinari action undertaken situat sever tension financi market would like stress rigor applic adjust programm govern essenti guarante progress return normal function financi market let conclud recent experi sinc demonstr import decisionmak analys lucid unexpect situat face act time manner need soon becam clear intens recent market disrupt could impli serious consequ price stabil euro area took firm action said time perman alert alway prepar act necessari price stabil central contribut monetari polici make econom growth job creation financi stabil success track record sinc incept euro term low inflat rate wellanchor inflat expect remark sinc incept euro year ago april year averag annual inflat euro area exact line definit price stabil better achiev major central bank period mani decad includ bundesbank ecb measur cannot substitut action requir address deepseat fundament problem remain other nation govern regul supervisor privat sector financi industri proceed difficult vital measur requir reestablish trust wellfunct market economi reli cohes action european level essenti allevi current tension action also support sound longerterm econom recoveri euro area beyond benefit us live work europ call euro area govern work togeth look ahead countri take respons major improv need made prevent bad fiscal behaviour ensur effect implement recommend made partner enforc real effect sanction case breach equal decis european commiss eurogroup engag effect control evolut relat competit insid euro area includ evolut unit labour cost implement structur reform surveil peer essenc elev growth potenti europ call euro area govern particular work activ togeth reach agreement quantum leap effect collegi surveil thank attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en