Jean-Claude Trichet: What lessons can be learned from the economic and financial crisis?,17-03-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,3157,"<p>Monsieur le Président,Mesdames et Messieurs,the “Rencontres de l’Entreprise Européenne” were established – if I may interpret your mission – as a tribute to entrepreneurship, the engine of growth in Europe and, more broadly, in the global economy. Looking around this room, I see myself surrounded by many entrepreneurial people who create the conditions for sustainable growth, who invest in both physical capital and human capital, and who are patient enough to wait for deferred payoffs. As a central banker, I very much appreciate the medium-term orientation of business. The current crisis has exposed a different and less far-sighted kind of investment attitude. I want to draw some parallels, and make some distinctions, between the two forms of economic activity and the lessons to be learned from them. Tonight, I would like to examine the roots of the current crisis and the policy responses, which are taken to address it and to inspire a new sense of direction. I will also explain what I see as the main factors that can provide the basis for a resurgence of growth in the not so distant future. A future that will see companies and their employees in the real economy return to the forefront of economic activity. Throughout, I will take inspiration from the words of Jean Monnet: “To abandon a project because it meets too many obstacles is often a grave mistake: the obstacles themselves provide the friction to make movement possible.” (Jean Monnet, Mémoires, 1976). In the last ten years, we saw a dramatic shift in influence away from entrepreneurship in the real economy to speculation and gambling in the financial sector. The assumption and the hedging of genuine economic risk gradually ceased to be the main concern of international finance. This is the risk that companies face when introducing innovative new products and new processes. Over time, the creation and assumption of financial risk became the core activity of the financial industry. This is the risk inherent in arbitrage and deliberate exposure to asset price changes. At some point, the financial system seemed to be no longer there primarily to hedge existing economic risks, but more and more to create and propagate risks on its own. In the past two decades, financial innovation and liberalisation made important contributions to the overall productivity of our economies. But as the demand for finance increased throughout the 1990s, intermediaries had growing incentives to develop innovative funding techniques. The securitisation of assets, for example – the transformation of bilateral loans into tradable credit instruments – had tremendous potential to facilitate the diversification and efficient management of risk. As such, it was a powerful and useful tool. But securitisation also meant that banks and non-banks were able to sell credit – or place it off-balance sheet – immediately after it had been extended. This alchemy enabled lenders to expand the volume of their operations and conserve on capital. Fatally, the same mechanism weakened lenders’ incentives for prudent screening and steady monitoring. The resulting declines in underwriting standards and lending oversight was one of the main sources of the excessive credit boom.The credit boom had three multipliers. First, ill-designed compensation schemes for loan managers reinforced the shortening of lenders’ horizons. In the eyes of many loan managers, the short-run gains from an expansion of credit obscured the need for any consideration of the potential losses that their institution could incur over the longer term. Second, the complex structure of securitised products made it difficult for the ultimate holders to assess the quality of the underlying investment. This perpetuated the boom, as it took time for investors to discover and reassess the underlying risks. Third, international imbalances and their potential to encourage liquidity creation on a global scale acted as the macroeconomic – and perhaps most powerful – multiplier. A chronic shortage of savings in some of the world’s advanced economies was funded by an excess of savings in other parts of the world. These global macroeconomic imbalances contributed to the creation of international liquidity and therefore further fuelled credit and debt accumulation. In the period before the start of the crisis, the oil and commodity price shock augmented the savings glut even further.The interplay of the forces that I have described went into reverse – suddenly, although not unexpectedly – sometime in the middle of 2007. Liquidity dried up, and the entire financial sector was put under severe strain. The collapse of a major and highly interconnected financial player in mid-September of last year then turned the crisis of confidence into full-blown distress. This development also triggered the economic downturn that we are currently facing, and that has created a need to restore confidence throughout the global economy. The European Central Bank moved pre-emptively. It ensured the continued functioning of the money market at the very first signs of the turbulences in August 2007. We have not shied away from action at any time since then. Our actions have been early, resolute and broadly based. What did the ECB do and why? And how did these actions support the financial sector and the real economy? In times of distress, banks and other financial intermediaries instinctively reduce their exposure to risks. Individually, they try to change the composition of their assets; they reduce illiquid investments and increase liquidity. Collectively, this process leads to what is known as “deleveraging”. Banks’ intermediation is reduced in the aggregate, and loans to companies are curtailed. If this process unfolds in a disorderly manner, it can cause severe damage for borrowers and for the broader economy. At the first signs of liquidity hoarding by banks in August 2007, the ECB took several measures to protect against a disorderly correction in credit. Banks were not only concerned about the volume of liquidity that they could secure, but also about the horizon over which liquidity was expected to remain available to them. Therefore, we provided liquidity with long maturities, as a way to insure banks against future liquidity shortfalls. This helped bolster public confidence that banks would continue to be able to meet their obligations. At the same time, it encouraged banks – which, as you know, are so central to Europe’s financial architecture – not to discontinue lending relationships with their customers. Since the intensification of the crisis in September and October 2008, the ECB has – under profoundly changed global conditions, falling commodity prices and rapidly receding inflationary pressures – stepped up its crisis resolution measures, including through non-standard means, to protect the viability of our financial system. Again, our primary concern in the area of support to the financial sector has been to preserve the availability of credit for companies and households at accessible rates. One can therefore describe our policies as enhanced credit support. Under our generalised “fixed-rate full-allotment” procedure, in place since October, eligible euro area banks have been granted access to unlimited liquidity from one week to six months’ duration at our main policy interest rate. Another non-standard measure has been the considerable expansion of the list of eligible assets that banks can pledge as collateral. This has eased banks’ balance sheet constraints, and encouraged them to extend new credit or continue rolling over maturing loans to firms. As the inflationary pressures that we were still observing until last summer, receded rapidly, we have also been able to grant unlimited access to central bank credit at a sharply decreasing cost. Our key policy rate has been reduced by 275 basis points since the crisis worsened in the autumn. At present, the Eurosystem is providing unlimited refinancing at a rate of 1.5%. And sound and creditworthy banks can secure overnight credit at an interest rate which is in between the main policy rate, namely 1.5%, and the deposit rate, namely 0.5%. At present the overnight rate is at a level unseen in the entire post-war history of European monetary affairs. Being able to borrow at such low costs, banks can grant credit to other banks and to their non-bank customers at conditions that are very accommodative by historical and international standards. Thanks, in particular, to smaller spreads between the interbank money market rates and the OIS rates, the 6-month and 12-month EURIBOR rates are lower than the corresponding LIBOR rates for contracts denominated in US dollars. Enhanced credit support has also meant a considerable expansion of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet. The size of our balance sheet is currently around €600 billion above its pre-crisis volume. This measures the size of the additional intermediation we are undertaking – substituting for the market. The size of our balance sheet represents today around 16% of euro area GDP compared with 10% before the crisis; the Federal Reserve System’s balance sheet is around 13% of US GDP. The additional intermediation has prevented a seizing up of the whole credit market. Short-term interest rates on loans to households and businesses have declined. The pass-through of the ECB interest rates to the economy has proceeded in accordance with past regularities. How does this policy course of enhanced credit support compare with the approaches of some other central banks grappling with tumult in financial markets? Since mid-September 2008 the Federal Reserve has pursued a policy of direct “credit easing”. These measures are targeted at directly addressing instability or declining credit availability in critical non-bank channels of intermediation.The euro area and the United States have significantly different financial structures. While the United States has a primarily market-based financial system, the euro area is largely bank-centred. A few illustrative figures give an idea of the differences. At the end of 2007, the stock of outstanding bank loans to the private sector amounted to around 145% of GDP in the euro area, but only 63% in the United States. Correspondingly, the incidence of direct debt securities was 81% of GDP in the euro area and 168 % in the United States. The structures of private credit outstanding in the euro area and the United States are almost mirror images: the recourse to banks on this side of the Atlantic makes up two-thirds of non-equity external finance. On the other side, the equivalent proportion is only around 30%. This has important explanatory power for interpreting the approaches that we have taken in the euro area and in the United States. In the context of the euro area, guaranteeing firms and households a steady access to credit largely means ensuring the banking system has appropriate liquidity. In the euro area, it is natural for “credit easing” to be implemented primarily through the participation of banks. As regards non-conventional measures, let me recall the following. We have already decided upon a number of them, including the non-standard commitment decided at our last meeting to prolong the unlimited supply of liquidity at fixed rates as long as needed, and in any case beyond the end of 2009. Moreover, as I said in my press conference of 5 March, we are in an ongoing process of studying further measures and assessing the possible need for them.Reviewing our actions over the past few months, there is one further point that I wish to highlight: the central bank was not alone in tackling this financial and economic crisis. I have been deeply impressed by the action plan drawn up by euro area governments and the European Commission since last October within an extremely short period of time. In the past, some outside observers have questioned the euro area’s ability to act in a timely fashion in the event of a major economic emergency. Last October euro area governments and the European Commission demonstrated their strength and unity of purpose. Governments’ coordinated bank recapitalisation and guarantee schemes proved vital for preserving the viability of the euro area financial system in extremely tense conditions.Looking ahead to the resolution of this crisis, the following is a good starting point: we should start by distinguishing carefully between the many things that were wrong and need to change, and the many other things that were right and that we can continue to count on. A number of “monuments” and “totems” of the pre-crisis economic universe have now lost most of their value. From this standpoint, the reforms proposed by the Financial Stability Forum and currently considered by the G20 should be implemented with vigour. At the same time, other elements have maintained their worth. It is on these elements that we should build the future of this continent. I will mention three assets on which we can count in this effort. The first asset is our single currency. The euro has certainly proven its worth during the crisis. If the countries of Europe that now make up the euro area had been forced to withstand the financial turmoil alone, with their floating currencies, currency crises would have been likely. The crisis in the European Monetary System in 1992 and 1993 naturally comes to my mind. With the benefit of hindsight, we can see the introduction of the euro ten years ago as a forward-looking response to the challenges of today. And let us not forget that the process leading to the introduction of the euro owes a great deal to the prescience of President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing and Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, who in the late 1970s conceived the European Monetary System and the precursor to the euro, the ECU.A second lasting resource for Europe is a macroeconomic policy framework oriented towards the medium term. With hindsight observers now acknowledge that macroeconomic policies in some economies have in the past been insufficiently focused on medium-term stability and sustainability. In the euro area policy commitments to price stability over the medium term and to the long-run sustainability of public finances helped, by and large, to contain the size of macroeconomic imbalances. This has contributed to job creation. In the past ten years, the euro area created more than 2 million jobs in excess of the number created over the same period in the US economy. The third asset is a group of factors that have made our real economies in Europe successful in recent years: our openness to trade; our balanced and dynamic business structures; our talented and well-trained workforces.None of these factors is single-faceted. It is well known that international comparisons of productivity growth started to paint a bleak picture of the euro area countries in the middle of the 1990s. While the measured pace of growth of output per hour worked halved after 1995 in our economies, it almost doubled in the United States. In trying to understand the causes of that poor performance we discovered that the share of the population in tertiary education was almost two-thirds higher in the United States than in the European Union and that US and Japanese performance was superior in terms of patents granted. But we also discovered that the EU, and the euro area in particular, was home to at least two of the world’s innovation leaders – Germany and Finland – and that this country, France, together with Belgium is on a par with the United States in terms of the structural conditions required for innovation, investment in research and development, and the successful application of know-how. Furthermore, we learned that the financial sector, a principal user of information and communications technologies, was the main source of the greater dynamism in the United States. Conversely, a smaller share of that sector in total value added was seen as the main obstacle to the diffusion of such technologies, and thus a drag on overall productivity, in the euro area economies. Today, this much smaller share of financial services in the euro area economy can probably act as a partial protection against the recessionary forces that the downsizing of those activities is exerting on many of our international partners. The openness of our economies, too, has been seen as a major challenge, not an opportunity. Certainly, greater openness has meant that our economies have been more exposed to the international crisis. But the trend towards global trade integration has resulted in a major adjustment of production patterns in the euro area. Many countries have profoundly adjusted their export portfolios according to their technological advantages and towards products that are more skill-intensive and more capital-intensive. This upgrade of our production structure will make European firms better prepared to withstand a decline in trade volumes. From an economic perspective, resilience is a virtue, protectionism is a sin. Fiscal and monetary authorities constantly endeavour to shield their jurisdictions from shocks and disturbances that can destabilise economic behaviour and expectations, and thus damage aggregate incomes and collective welfare. But this must be done without building walls and fortresses around the economy. Open markets are the valuable result of a long and painful process of trade liberalisation that has lasted over 60 years. This process has dismantled barriers between countries and has included an expanding share of the world population in a network of exchange and growing economic prosperity. And we know from past experience in the 20th Century that protectionism would be a recipe for economic disaster. More than ever, in the present very demanding circumstances, confidence is key. The global economy was hit in mid-September 2008 by an unprecedented abrupt loss of confidence. It was perhaps the first time in economic history that a single negative event was able, within a few days, to have a simultaneous and negative effect on all private economic agents in every economy, industrialised and emerging. This is why we are presently in uncharted waters, and the risk of abrupt economic and financial phenomena and unprecedented behaviour on the part of economic agents remains. Public authorities, executive branches, and central banks must do all they can to regain, preserve and foster confidence among households and corporations to pave the way for sustainable prosperity. This calls for actions to be measured. We must maintain the appropriate balance between the need to take immediate action commensurate with the gravity of today’s situation and the equally undeniable obligation to return to a path that is sustainable in the medium to long term. Confidence of households and corporations today depends crucially on their trust in the capacity of authorities to preserve the soundness and sustainability of fiscal positions in the years to come. Confidence of economic agents today depends equally on their trust in the determination of central banks to preserve price stability – in Europe less than 2% but close to 2% - in the medium and long run.It is essential to achieve this balance between the measured audacity of today’s non-conventional decisions and the credible determination to ensure a path that is sustainable in the medium and long term. Exaggerated swings without perspective would delay the return of sustainable prosperity, because they would undermine confidence, which is the most precious ingredient in the present circumstances.Europe can count on the ECB to continue to strike the right balance between audacity and wisdom, in line with its mandate. In acting in this way, the ECB will continue to offer a solid anchor of stability and confidence. Thank you for your attention.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",monsieur le président mesdam et messieur rencontr de l entrepris européenn establish may interpret mission tribut entrepreneurship engin growth europ broad global economi look around room see surround mani entrepreneuri peopl creat condit sustain growth invest physic capit human capit patient enough wait defer payoff central banker much appreci mediumterm orient busi current crisi expos differ less farsight kind invest attitud want draw parallel make distinct two form econom activ lesson learn tonight would like examin root current crisi polici respons taken address inspir new sens direct also explain see main factor provid basi resurg growth distant futur futur see compani employe real economi return forefront econom activ throughout take inspir word jean monnet abandon project meet mani obstacl often grave mistak obstacl provid friction make movement possibl jean monnet mémoir last ten year saw dramat shift influenc away entrepreneurship real economi specul gambl financi sector assumpt hedg genuin econom risk gradual ceas main concern intern financ risk compani face introduc innov new product new process time creation assumpt financi risk becam core activ financi industri risk inher arbitrag deliber exposur asset price chang point financi system seem longer primarili hedg exist econom risk creat propag risk past two decad financi innov liberalis made import contribut overal product economi demand financ increas throughout intermediari grow incent develop innov fund techniqu securitis asset exampl transform bilater loan tradabl credit instrument tremend potenti facilit diversif effici manag risk power use tool securitis also meant bank nonbank abl sell credit place offbal sheet immedi extend alchemi enabl lender expand volum oper conserv capit fatal mechan weaken lender incent prudent screen steadi monitor result declin underwrit standard lend oversight one main sourc excess credit boom credit boom three multipli first illdesign compens scheme loan manag reinforc shorten lender horizon eye mani loan manag shortrun gain expans credit obscur need consider potenti loss institut could incur longer term second complex structur securitis product made difficult ultim holder assess qualiti under invest perpetu boom took time investor discov reassess under risk third intern imbal potenti encourag liquid creation global scale act macroeconom perhap power multipli chronic shortag save world advanc economi fund excess save part world global macroeconom imbal contribut creation intern liquid therefor fuell credit debt accumul period start crisi oil commod price shock augment save glut even interplay forc describ went revers sudden although unexpect sometim middl liquid dri entir financi sector put sever strain collaps major high interconnect financi player midseptemb last year turn crisi confid fullblown distress develop also trigger econom downturn current face creat need restor confid throughout global economi european central bank move preemptiv ensur continu function money market first sign turbul august shi away action time sinc action earli resolut broad base ecb action support financi sector real economi time distress bank financi intermediari instinct reduc exposur risk individu tri chang composit asset reduc illiquid invest increas liquid collect process lead known deleverag bank intermedi reduc aggreg loan compani curtail process unfold disord manner caus sever damag borrow broader economi first sign liquid hoard bank august ecb took sever measur protect disord correct credit bank concern volum liquid could secur also horizon liquid expect remain avail therefor provid liquid long matur way insur bank futur liquid shortfal help bolster public confid bank would continu abl meet oblig time encourag bank know central europ financi architectur discontinu lend relationship custom sinc intensif crisi septemb octob ecb profound chang global condit fall commod price rapid reced inflationari pressur step crisi resolut measur includ nonstandard mean protect viabil financi system primari concern area support financi sector preserv avail credit compani household access rate one therefor describ polici enhanc credit support generalis fixedr fullallot procedur place sinc octob elig euro area bank grant access unlimit liquid one week six month durat main polici interest rate anoth nonstandard measur consider expans list elig asset bank pledg collater eas bank balanc sheet constraint encourag extend new credit continu roll matur loan firm inflationari pressur still observ last summer reced rapid also abl grant unlimit access central bank credit sharpli decreas cost key polici rate reduc basi point sinc crisi worsen autumn present eurosystem provid unlimit refinanc rate sound creditworthi bank secur overnight credit interest rate main polici rate name deposit rate name present overnight rate level unseen entir postwar histori european monetari affair abl borrow low cost bank grant credit bank nonbank custom condit accommod histor intern standard thank particular smaller spread interbank money market rate oi rate month month euribor rate lower correspond libor rate contract denomin us dollar enhanc credit support also meant consider expans eurosystem balanc sheet size balanc sheet current around billion precrisi volum measur size addit intermedi undertak substitut market size balanc sheet repres today around euro area gdp compar crisi feder reserv system balanc sheet around us gdp addit intermedi prevent seiz whole credit market shortterm interest rate loan household busi declin passthrough ecb interest rate economi proceed accord past regular polici cours enhanc credit support compar approach central bank grappl tumult financi market sinc midseptemb feder reserv pursu polici direct credit eas measur target direct address instabl declin credit avail critic nonbank channel intermedi euro area unit state signific differ financi structur unit state primarili marketbas financi system euro area larg bankcentr illustr figur give idea differ end stock outstand bank loan privat sector amount around gdp euro area unit state correspond incid direct debt secur gdp euro area unit state structur privat credit outstand euro area unit state almost mirror imag recours bank side atlant make twothird nonequ extern financ side equival proport around import explanatori power interpret approach taken euro area unit state context euro area guarante firm household steadi access credit larg mean ensur bank system appropri liquid euro area natur credit eas implement primarili particip bank regard nonconvent measur let recal follow alreadi decid upon number includ nonstandard commit decid last meet prolong unlimit suppli liquid fix rate long need case beyond end moreov said press confer march ongo process studi measur assess possibl need review action past month one point wish highlight central bank alon tackl financi econom crisi deepli impress action plan drawn euro area govern european commiss sinc last octob within extrem short period time past outsid observ question euro area abil act time fashion event major econom emerg last octob euro area govern european commiss demonstr strength uniti purpos govern coordin bank recapitalis guarante scheme prove vital preserv viabil euro area financi system extrem tens condit look ahead resolut crisi follow good start point start distinguish care mani thing wrong need chang mani thing right continu count number monument totem precrisi econom univers lost valu standpoint reform propos financi stabil forum current consid g implement vigour time element maintain worth element build futur contin mention three asset count effort first asset singl currenc euro certain proven worth crisi countri europ make euro area forc withstand financi turmoil alon float currenc currenc crise would like crisi european monetari system natur come mind benefit hindsight see introduct euro ten year ago forwardlook respons challeng today let us forget process lead introduct euro owe great deal prescienc presid valéri giscard d esta chancellor helmut schmidt late conceiv european monetari system precursor euro ecu second last resourc europ macroeconom polici framework orient toward medium term hindsight observ acknowledg macroeconom polici economi past insuffici focus mediumterm stabil sustain euro area polici commit price stabil medium term longrun sustain public financ help larg contain size macroeconom imbal contribut job creation past ten year euro area creat million job excess number creat period us economi third asset group factor made real economi europ success recent year open trade balanc dynam busi structur talent welltrain workforc none factor singlefacet well known intern comparison product growth start paint bleak pictur euro area countri middl measur pace growth output per hour work halv economi almost doubl unit state tri understand caus poor perform discov share popul tertiari educ almost twothird higher unit state european union us japanes perform superior term patent grant also discov eu euro area particular home least two world innov leader germani finland countri franc togeth belgium par unit state term structur condit requir innov invest research develop success applic knowhow furthermor learn financi sector princip user inform communic technolog main sourc greater dynam unit state convers smaller share sector total valu ad seen main obstacl diffus technolog thus drag overal product euro area economi today much smaller share financi servic euro area economi probabl act partial protect recessionari forc downsiz activ exert mani intern partner open economi seen major challeng opportun certain greater open meant economi expos intern crisi trend toward global trade integr result major adjust product pattern euro area mani countri profound adjust export portfolio accord technolog advantag toward product skillintens capitalintens upgrad product structur make european firm better prepar withstand declin trade volum econom perspect resili virtu protection sin fiscal monetari author constant endeavour shield jurisdict shock disturb destabilis econom behaviour expect thus damag aggreg incom collect welfar must done without build wall fortress around economi open market valuabl result long pain process trade liberalis last year process dismantl barrier countri includ expand share world popul network exchang grow econom prosper know past experi th centuri protection would recip econom disast ever present demand circumst confid key global economi hit midseptemb unpreced abrupt loss confid perhap first time econom histori singl negat event abl within day simultan negat effect privat econom agent everi economi industrialis emerg present unchart water risk abrupt econom financi phenomena unpreced behaviour part econom agent remain public author execut branch central bank must regain preserv foster confid among household corpor pave way sustain prosper call action measur must maintain appropri balanc need take immedi action commensur graviti today situat equal undeni oblig return path sustain medium long term confid household corpor today depend crucial trust capac author preserv sound sustain fiscal posit year come confid econom agent today depend equal trust determin central bank preserv price stabil europ less close medium long run essenti achiev balanc measur audac today nonconvent decis credibl determin ensur path sustain medium long term exagger swing without perspect would delay return sustain prosper would undermin confid precious ingredi present circumst europ count ecb continu strike right balanc audac wisdom line mandat act way ecb continu offer solid anchor stabil confid thank attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en