Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: A failure of capitalism?,16-10-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,6514,"<p>Since the financial crisis erupted, there has been no lack of opportunity to put on trial the people presumed responsible for the upheavals of recent times: the bankers for taking excessive risks; the regulators for not supervising the bankers; the rating agencies for mispricing the risks; the central bankers for creating too much cheap money; the economists for not foreseeing the crisis; the journalists for turning that crisis into a drama. Such calls to account may be useful to understand what went wrong and what must be done to put the system right. But as it’s tempting to regard all of them as culprits, each of them can then escape the blame, and the accusing finger turns to the system itself: it’s capitalism that’s at fault. The system can be improved – and many initiatives are under way to that end – but it includes inherently unstable elements that we have to live with. One example of this position is reflected in a comment made to the BBC by Alan Greenspan, the former Chairman of the US Federal Reserve: “ The crisis will happen again but it will be different. Crises are all different, but they have one fundamental source. That is the unquenchable capability of human beings when confronted with long periods of prosperity to presume that it will continue”. [1]In other words, it’s human nature to drive fast, over the limit. So accidents are inevitable. You can only try to make them less serious by fitting stronger brakes in cars, or by giving them airbags or by improving the roads. This analogy is frequently used to explain the financial crisis and to suggest that since we can’t really avoid new crises, we should rather try to reduce their impact and enhance our defences by having tougher regulations and more effective supervisory mechanisms. In his book ‘A Failure of Capitalism’, Richard Posner [2] – one of the leading ideologues and advocates of the free market – offers a critique of the capitalist system. In his view, the root of the crisis lies in the explosive mix of an expansive monetary policy and excessive deregulation – a mix that has caused financial operators to take risks of a magnitude greater than they could manage. But Posner goes one step further. He claims that those who made the misjudgements, in particular financial operators, knew that what they were doing was very risky, and could even lead to a crisis, although they weren’t able to estimate its scope.Posner writes: “ I do not believe that the financial crisis is the result of stupidity or irrationality, criminality or even ignorance. I think that even most of the consumers who bought houses with mortgages they could not “afford” knew what they were doing – speculating not unreasonably on a continued rise in house prices.” And he adds : “I believe that the senior executives of the major banks were aware that there might be at least a small probability of bankruptcy as a result of the risks they were taking”.Alan Greenspan, who must have known many of these senior executives, seems to be of the same opinion, for in that same BBC interview he said: “ The bankers knew that they were involved in an under-pricing of risk and that at some point a correction would be made”. This view seems to be confirmed by the memorable comment made by Chuck Prince, former Chairman and CEO of Citigroup, in the summer of 2007, just a few days before the crisis broke: “As long as the music is playing, we’ve got to get up and dance. We’re still dancing”. [3] This remark – which I believe is not only symptomatic of the crisis but also key to understanding it – has often been quoted but perhaps not sufficiently analysed. It seems to support Posner’s argument that the managers of the big banks knew they had taken major risks and ventured into activities rather like the game of musical chairs. Those managers were well aware that, sooner or later, the music would stop and the race for the remaining chairs would start. They didn’t know how many chairs would be left or how far away they would be from them – all they knew was that at some time the music would finish. Evidently, each of them expected, or hoped, to beat the others to a chair. Why were they so confident? Their expectations were based on the assumption that the most profitable financial institutions would also be the most resistant to any abrupt stopping of the ‘music’ – an assumption linked to the yardstick by which they were measured in the financial sector, in other words, profitability. One bank is more capable than another, and thus worth more, if it earns more than another, not in the space of five or six years, but in a period of three months. A trader is more capable than another if he earns more for his bank and, as a result, earns more for himself. A bank (plus its managers) which made large profits in the past would feel justified to regard itself as being more capable than the others and would continue to think like that even if it foresaw the crisis. It did not consider, or did not want to consider, that its profits were larger than those of the other banks because it had taken more risks – risks that would slow it down in its rush for the empty chair when the music stopped. There’s another interesting detail in Chuck Prince’s comment – his use of the verb “got to” (“ you’ve got to get up and dance”). Prince seems to be suggesting that there are no alternatives, as if some external force is pushing him and his bank, along with the others, to take more and more risks. It seems difficult to believe, but not that difficult after all. In her book ‘Fool’s Gold’, Gillian Tett [4] explains how the continual comparison of the results of various banks, and even inside the banks between the various teams – results based on profits obtained – encouraged the banks and employees to take ever greater risks in order to obtain better results. Reporting on an internal discussion at an investment bank, Tett writes: “2005 had been another record year for the banking world: the largest investment banks had collectively raised their revenues by 31% to USD 289 billion. In that time, however, JPMorgan Chase had produced only a modest result. So what should JPMorgan do? Was it time for the bank to reconsider entering the mortgage CDO and CDS game?” (p.164).This quote confirms that the bankers were well aware that if they wanted to make their bank more profitable they had to increase the degree of risk, to “join the game”, in other words, to enter the casino. We should not make the mistake of considering that such a perverse system of incentives is limited to the banking world. In the end, it’s the shareholders and savers who demand better returns on their investments. It’s the savers, both large and small, who want their fund managers, be they banks, pension funds or investment funds, to beat the competition, and the benchmark is the rate of return. If their savings bring poorer returns than others, then they will invest them where the returns are higher. The fund managers will try to anticipate such shifts, replacing their less effective personnel with those who obtain better results, even if they take greater risks.Profit maximisation by entrepreneurs is what drives capitalism. It is the best way to reward investment and thereby promote long-term economic growth. This assumption underlies the theoretical models we use to analyse economic development. It is also consistent with the kind of human incentive that Greenspan and Posner were referring to.The literature has analysed how perfect competition in the product and labour markets ensures that the benefits of growth are distributed among all market participants. In an ideal world with perfect competition the profit on marginal investments tends to zero, as all resources are fully exploited. However, we know that in reality we do not have fully competitive markets. Indeed, sometimes even the entrepreneurs themselves take strong action to prevent markets from operating under conditions of perfect competition. In their book ‘Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists’, [5] Rajan and Zingales explain well the inherent contradiction of a market economy, namely that entrepreneurs can benefit from regulation that reduces competition and maximises their rent. The entrepreneurs thus have an incentive to lobby the legislator to adopt regulation aimed at increasing the barriers to entry. Such legislation tends to redistribute welfare from consumers to producers, but also reduces overall demand and investment and thus economic growth. Excessive regulation, aimed at safeguarding inefficient monopolistic rents, can cause an economy to stagnate. This leads Rajan and Zingales to argue that, for capitalism to produce all its benefits, it must put up strong barriers, also at the political level, to that reflex of capitalists to over-regulate markets. These barriers encouraged the wave of de-regulation which spread through advanced and emerging market economies as from the mid-1980s. The same reasoning has been applied to finance – maybe without understanding that financial services are quite special, and different from other products. This difference has become even more difficult to understand during the crisis, as some – like the German Chancellor Angela Merkel – have asked: “ Why is it when I buy a product I know what I am buying, but when I buy a financial product I do not know?” [6] Many of us have probably wondered this when trying to understand what caused this crisis. The answer is twofold. Firstly, if you buy a financial product you are, by definition, buying risk. If you only want to preserve the nominal value of your savings, you should just hold cash. The return on an investment compensates you for the inherent risk of the asset you acquire. In other words, the value of a financial instrument is uncertain because it is subject to risk. The greater the risk, the greater the return should be. The second part of the answer is that it is not always easy to assess risk. Anyone who enters into a transaction should make his or her own assessment. That may vary not only because of the probability of a specific event, such as the default of the counterparty, but also because of the probability of other events, affecting for instance the other assets held in the portfolio of an investor. But, more importantly, the buyer and seller may value the risk of an asset differently because they might have different information about the asset itself, and its characteristics. In particular the seller – by which I mean the originator – of the asset tends to have more information than the buyer. If the former can hide some of the information, in particular about the risk of the asset, he can sell it at a higher price. In other words, the rate of return will not cover the intrinsic risk of the asset.This is where the difference between financial products and other products is relevant, not only for individuals but also for society. Earlier I mentioned that, in a world of perfect competition an industry should attract investment, and thus grow until marginal profits are brought down to zero. This assumes that both the seller and buyer are able to assess the price of the good or service exchanged. If the buyer believes that the good is of higher quality than it really is he or she will buy a larger quantity, for a given price, and thus increase the sales and profits of the company selling the product. In other words, if an investor thinks that a financial asset is less risky than it really is, he or she will buy a higher amount, and the profits of the financial industry will increase. This means that the more the risk is undervalued by investors, the greater the profit opportunities for the financial industry are, and the greater the scope for further expanding in particular through financial innovation, which may hide the inherent asymmetry of information. Pushing the argument further, in a competitive environment there are incentives for the financial industry to increase the asymmetry of information – it can increase its revenues and profits that way.To sum up, a market economy has a natural tendency to produce and consume financial assets to an excessive degree, and that may destabilise the economy. The key difference, again, compared with the other sectors of the economy, is the inherent asymmetry of information which underlies the relationship between producers and consumers of financial instruments. This is why (some) regulation is needed to preserve sound and stable financial markets. The financiers’ incentives are diametrically opposed to those of the capitalists considered by Rajan and Zingales. For the latter, the more regulation there is, the better, because it protects the incumbents from external competition, and thus maximises their monopolistic rents. The incumbents are ready to lobby the regulators and legislators to increase the regulatory barriers, to protect their rents. The regulatory pressure will only abate if the potential external competitors and consumers can mobilise sufficient resources and forces to counter such lobbying. In the financial industry, it’s the other way round. The outsiders, who are not subject to regulation, can become more profitable than the insiders if they are able to sell to investors high-risk assets with returns which appear to offer disproportionate rewards. Financial regulation does not protect the incumbents from outside competition, unlike in other industries, but instead prevents the insiders from conducting more profitable – and more risky – business practices that the outsiders can perform in the non-regulated sectors. I will not consider in detail why the non-regulated financial sector has grown to become more profitable than the regulated one, the opposite of what should happen in the real economy. Asymmetric information is again at the heart of the matter. In the real economy the inventor of a product can protect his intellectual property and investment in production by seeking a copyright. Production, distribution and sales can be planned on the basis of such protection. In the financial system there is no such a thing as copyright. No product can be protected. No copyrights exist for CDOs, CLOs, CLSs, swaps, etc. This is why financial instruments or financial institutions’ balance sheets cannot be perfectly transparent. It would destroy the business. If a successful fund manager were obliged to fully disclose his investment strategy, others would immediately do the same and he would go out of business. Financial regulation was intended primarily to prevent very opaque and risky products from being produced by financial institutions and sold to savers. Over the years, however, a shadow banking system, unregulated, has developed, which aims to produce and sell the kinds of product not normally available in the regulated market. This trend has been tolerated by regulators because these high-risk financial products were developed and purchased by wealthy institutions and individuals who were supposed to understand the risk and deal with it. Moreover, the institutions developing such products were not considered as being systemically important – it was not thought that their failure would jeopardise the stability of the financial system. This was why hedge funds were left unregulated, even after the collapse of LTCM, an event which should have raised the alarm. The shadow financial system was relatively small at the end of the 1990s. But over the past decade it has grown enormously, in particular the hedge funds and investment banks. The speculative activity of the traditional banking sector has also developed exponentially. Let me give you some figures: the total assets of the five major US investment banks as a percentage of US GDP increased from about 13% in Q1 1999 to 31% in Q1 2008. [7] As for the global hedge fund industry, the capital under its management went up from USD 155 billion to USD 1.5 trillion between Q1 1999 and Q1 2008. That’s a staggering 853% increase. [8]There are basically two factors behind this development. The first, as already mentioned, is the higher profitability of the non-regulated financial sector compared with the regulated one, which has pushed the former to enter aggressively into the latter’s business. The quote taken from Gillian Tett’s book is quite telling in this respect. The higher profitability of the non-regulated sector attracted the attention of the regulated one, which tried to equip itself to enter into higher-risk business, in particular to originate and distribute high-risk products, in particular through off-balance sheet vehicles. The more regulated institutions entered such high-risk business, the less profitable this business became, because of the greater competition. This in turn created the incentive in the non-regulated sector to innovate, creating more sophisticated products, which often were too sophisticated for other institutions. As I mentioned, increasing competition in finance tends to promote risk-taking and thus potential instability.We know what the solution to this problem is – regulation. This brings me to the second factor behind the development of the shadow banking system: the lack of regulation or even the deregulation of the system. In the ten years leading up to the crisis, not only was the burgeoning shadow banking system left unregulated, but also the traditional banking system was deregulated and allowed to enter into businesses which should have been reserved for the shadow banking. The US offers the best-known example of deregulation. The repeal, in 1999, of the Glass-Steagall Act removed the barrier between commercial and investment banks. As a consequence, the latter started to operate in the traditional banking business although they were not subject to supervision by the Federal Reserve. In particular, the investment banks entered into the mortgage business and developed portfolios that were repackaged and resold as CDOs and other instruments. The result was that the commercial banks came under greater competitive pressure and probably felt they had to enter into riskier kinds of business. The lack of regulation as regards several components of the financial system has been highlighted in a number of reports. Activities of systemic importance were, for instance, not subject to any form of regulation. There was, for example, a lack of transparency in the OTC derivatives business, a lack of oversight for hedge funds, not to mention other shortcomings. Moreover, the narrow focus of the regulation that did exist, relating to traditional commercial banks, encouraged them to transfer parts of their business to unregulated entities off the balance sheet, and they thus exploited gaps in the accounting framework. Why did this happen? This is a key question that must be answered if we want to build a better system and not just plug the leak. Let me start by suggesting how it happened. Clearly, the decisions not to regulate the shadow banking system and to deregulate the financial industry were taken deliberately. It was undeniably in the interests of the shadow banking system not to be regulated. And it was also in the interests of the banking system to be deregulated. The increased profitability of the financial sector – which in the middle of this decade reached 40% of corporate profits in the US, more than double the average over the previous forty years – was also used to lobby the political authorities and the regulators with the aim of reducing regulation and supervision. A recent publication by two non-profit organisations, Essential Information and the Consumer Education Foundation, have estimated that over the 1998-2008 period about USD 5 billion was spent by financial institutions (including banks, investment banks, hedge funds, insurance companies, etc.) on campaign contributions and lobbying activities for the US Congress and Administration in order to get rid of a large part of the financial regulation enacted after the Great Depression. [9] The outcome is ironic: the lobbying ended up sowing the seeds of the biggest economic and financial crisis since the Great Depression. The report details all the draft bills that pushed deregulation forward. International competition in the financial sector has no doubt led legislators in various countries, in particular in Europe, to compete in order to secure a level playing field, which turned out to be lower and lower, in terms of regulatory constraints. A veritable race to the bottom.Lobbyists have even been granted some dignity in recent years as legislators have made it their custom to consult the industry whenever new regulatory – or should we better say deregulatory – initiatives were proposed, so as to ensure that the interested parties could express their views and influence those of the legislators. Asymmetry of information plays a role also in this relationship. Typically, financial market participants have greater knowledge of the financial products that are subject to regulation than political authorities and regulators, and can better assess and explain the reasons – including the advantages they would obtain – from deregulation, thus helping to implement what is in their best interest. The holding of regulators and political authorities captive by the financial industry has been one of the main factors underlying the deregulatory process and the regulatory delays in recent years. To sum up, a downward spiral has been created: the increased profitability of the financial sector over the years has encouraged lobbying for further deregulation of the industry, which then leads to still greater profitability and even more lobbying pressure. It’s reasonable to ask why no contrarian force has emerged to try and stop this spiral. One of the reasons is that the beneficiaries of deregulation and the developers of the shadow banking system have been quite diverse. Shareholders benefited from the search for higher yield, and from banks being able to enter into more profitable, albeit more risky, business. Companies benefited from the development of sophisticated financial products which allowed risk to be securitised, thus reducing the burden of debt. Rating agencies benefited from the development of new sophisticated instruments to which they had to attribute a synthetic rating. They even gave advice to banks on how to develop such instruments. Households benefited from the development of financial instruments which allowed them to borrow cheaply in order to buy consumer goods or houses. It’s difficult to imagine who, if anyone, during this Goldilocks scenario was a loser, except maybe those financial institutions and operators which were more cautious about playing the game. In other words, the losers were those who did not dance.And if so many people benefited from the system, the political authorities could only benefit, and encourage it, and their acquiescence increased. To quote a recent article by Simon Johnson: “Because everyone was getting richer, and the health of the national economy depended so heavily on growth in real estate and finance, no one in Washington had any incentive to question what was going on”. [10] Until something went wrong, that is. It was bound to go wrong, because the system of incentives led economic agents to search for higher and higher yields, even at the cost of reducing regulation or permitting unregulated activities, and thus made instability inevitable sooner or later. What I have just described might be considered as another way to characterise the reference to the “human factor” made in particular by Greenspan or to the rational behaviour mentioned by Richard Posner. It’s the chain of incentives of investors, institutions, supervisors, politicians which lead society to take upon itself a greater degree of risk of a private or public nature. As Alan Greenspan said: “ Unless somebody can find a way to change human nature, we will have more crises and none of them will look like this because no two crises have anything in common, except human nature”. It’s a very clear warning. What are we doing about it?I don’t want to give the impression that human nature cannot be changed. Hopefully this crisis will have thought some lessons. The problem is that the interconnectedness of the financial system makes it vulnerable to the behaviour of the less competent, those that do not learn the lesson. The dangers do not come from the ‘good dancers’, to use again Chuck Prince’s analogy. The good dancers will always find their seat when the music ends. The danger comes from the ‘bad dancers’, especially those who believe that they are as good as the others and embark on pirouettes, eventually stumbling and making others fall when the music stops. The functioning of markets is bound to be affected by those participants who have taken excessive risks, relative to their ability to manage them. They represent a danger for the system, as drunken drivers represent a danger for safe drivers. Hopefully this crisis has also convinced that it is difficult, if not impossible, for market participants to self-regulate in a way that would produce a less risky environment for financial systems. Again, self regulation works when all market participants agree to it, but the worst dancers will always have the incentive not to agree, and to deviate from regulation in order to be able to deliver similar returns. Under these conditions, regulation can only be imposed by an authority outside financial markets. Indeed, it should be in the interests of market participants – and of taxpayers – to have a powerful regulator “ established with the authority and courage to slow down the music for everyone”. [11] The initiatives that have been taken over the last few months, in particular by the G20, the FSB and the IMF, aim to fix the problems that gave rise to the crisis. I won’t go into all the initiatives, measures and commitments that have been made, for they are well known. They are all very important and necessary. We should nevertheless ask ourselves whether they are sufficient to tackle the causes of the crisis. We must ask ourselves whether, with their current status, the supervisory authorities will indeed have the power to slow the music down when they consider it essential to safeguard financial stability. We know that the pressures for deregulation will mount again, as soon as the crisis is over, financed by the huge profits that the financial sector will generate again. This is not a theoretical question, nor so far distant in the future. It is well known that very strong forces are at play right now – as we speak – to minimise the changes to the regulatory framework proposed after the crisis. And these forces will grow as the crisis recedes. Just to give an example, on 3 October 2009 the Financial Times had a front-page headline ‘ Top bankers launch fightback against feared regulatory overkill’ – an article reporting on discussions at the annual meetings of the Institute of International Finance.At a roundtable discussion at the IMF-World Bank Annual meetings in Istanbul recently, I heard a comment often made by some financial market participants: “ We don’t really need new regulation: everything is there. It should just be applied”. If this was true, the real question should be why the supervisory authorities have not made full use of the existing regulations, in particular the discretionary elements allowed for, such as in the second pillar of the Basel II framework. The answer is that the supervisory authorities have been put under extreme pressure, by the financial industry, market participants and even political authorities, not to use these discretionary powers, as they would cut the profits of the banking system. As capital is internationally mobile, financial companies tend to penalise those countries where supervision is tougher by moving their funds and operations to those where supervision is lighter. The crisis has shown that the countries that have incurred the lowest costs from the crisis are those where the supervisory authorities have stability as a top priority and where they have implemented regulation with the discretion available. One example is the use of dynamic provisioning of capital in Spain. In contrast, in several countries where the supervisory authorities have opted for a light approach, because they were pressured by the political authorities or were required to promote their domestic financial system, the taxpayers have paid a very heavy price. The costs of these regulatory and supervisory failures have been borne not only by the residents of the countries concerned but also by those of the other countries as a result of the crisis.The principle of home country supervision, which assigns responsibility to the supervisory authority of the country where the bank is incorporated, is viable only if there is confidence in the foreign supervisory body – that it can be trusted to do a good job and not be held captive by its industry or its political authorities. Without such confidence the single market cannot survive. How can we address these issues?Let me mention three areas in which, in my view, we should make progress – they are essential if we want to establish a more efficient supervisory structure and better protect the system from future crises. The first area concerns the independence of supervisors. As I just mentioned, at the root of the crisis is the regulatory and political ‘capture’ of supervisors. It leads them to favour short-term priorities over medium-term stability. It’s nothing new. It has been examined notably in the literature on the time inconsistency of optimal policy. Decision-making systems which are closely associated to political institutions tend to be biased towards the short term. Politicians are inevitably induced to aim at achieving something that is visible to their constituents during their term of office. For obvious electoral reasons, they are tempted to pursue policies that are more likely to have a short-term impact but which may be counter-productive over the medium term. In the same way, the electoral cycle discourages them from adopting policies of benefit to society over a time horizon which goes beyond their electoral mandate but which entails some hardship to be endured before then. Short-term pain rules out longer-term gain. A case in point is monetary policy. When it is implemented by policy-makers who are accountable to their constituents in the short term and who pursue two contrasting objectives – such as inflation and growth – the result might be a highly expansionary policy with excessive inflation. The solution has been to create, in most countries, independent central banks in charge of monetary policy and with a clearly defined objective, i.e. price stability. When this happened, some people reacted negatively, saying that a key aspect of economic policy should not be left to unelected technocrats. With the benefit of hindsight, few today would overturn this decision, as over the years independent central banks have kept prices stable – but not at the cost of economic growth.Can supervisors be made as independent as central banks? In some cases they can, at least from the operational point of view, when the task is assigned to central banks. Supervision conducted by independent central banks has proven to be more resistant to regulatory capture and to political pressure. But making supervisory authorities fully independent is a bit more complicated than doing the same with monetary policy-makers, because the objective of supervision cannot so easily be turned into a benchmark as simple as a percentage for the inflation rate. [12] If financial stability became the sole objective of the supervisory authority, the result might be excessive regulation to prevent the failure of any bank. But, for monetary policy, the primary objective of price stability does not rule out secondary objectives, which should be pursued without infringing the primary one. For supervisors the primary objective should be to promote the stability of the financial system, domestic and globally, but secondary objectives could also be foreseen, entailing in particular efficiency. Another constraint on the independence of supervisory authorities, one which is often mentioned in policy discussions, is that their decisions may have an impact on the taxpayer. So it requires some control by government authorities. I personally believe that this argument is flawed and misplaced. In the conduct of monetary policy, or the lender of last resort functions, independent central banks also take decisions which affect taxpayers, in a way which might be even more relevant than when supervisory authorities take their decisions, for instance when they assess the solvency of an institution. Can it be denied that it's better for society if such decisions are taken by an independent body which can assess in a fair way the options available for handling an insolvent bank and present those options to the fiscal authority? I will not dwell longer on this issue, but it certainly deserves further thought.The second area where progress is needed concerns international cooperation between supervisors. There is a broad consensus on this issue and certainly much progress has been achieved over the last few months. However, here, more than in other areas, the devil is in the detail. We can see it within the European Union, where the creation of three supervisory agencies, as proposed in the de Larosière report, is currently being discussed in the Council. Attempts to limit the scope of cooperation and avoid interference with national competences are never far away. Some progress has been made with the creation of Colleges of Supervisors, which exist for the major banks. However this can only be an intermediate step as the many Memorandums of Understanding do not necessarily guarantee a level playing field for supervisory functions. The presence of European Agencies’ representatives in the colleges, as is currently proposed, would represent a first step towards ensuring some consistency in supervisory approaches.The third area refers to the accountability of supervisors. Who supervises the supervisors? Accountability is currently established at the national level, because – it is often stated – it’s up to the national taxpayers to pick up the bill. In other words, it’s up to the national political authorities, who represent their taxpayers, to be in charge of assessing the activities of the supervisors. However, as the current crisis has shown, some taxpayers had to pick up the bill of institutions which should have been better supervised by foreign supervisory authorities. In a global financial system, the domestic political authorities cannot by themselves really ensure the accountability of the domestic supervisor. Another constraint on the current system derives from the complexity of the activities performed by the supervisory authorities. This makes the exercise of accountability quite difficult, especially for non-experts. Unlike monetary policy, the effectiveness of which can be summarised in a few statistics, supervisory activity cannot be reduced to just the number of institutions which are supervised or have failed, or to the number of warnings which have been issued. What is currently missing is a system of expert international monitoring and assessment of the activities performed by supervisory authorities. Institutions like the IMF, the OECD, or the European Commission in the EU, are in charge of monitoring and assessing the performance of central banks, fiscal authorities and governments in a general way, with respect to a wide range of policies and activities. Supervision does not fall within the realm of this international cooperation. There are forums where supervisory authorities hold discussions in order to achieve convergence in supervisory practices and to exchange information on how they perform their functions. But there is no independent assessment of how these functions are performed.After the Asian crisis of 1997-98, the G7 agreed to entrust the IMF with Financial Sector Assessment Programs in all countries to assess the resilience of the financial systems in advanced and emerging economies. Aside from the fact that not all countries participated in that assessment, it is only a snapshot of the current situation. What would be needed is a periodic evaluation of the activities performed by the supervisory authorities in the major countries, in order to assess not only their independence but also the way in which they carry out their functions. Such an assessment would be of great benefit to the national political authorities to whom the supervisors are accountable.To sum up, the current initiatives to strengthen the regulatory framework are essential. On the other hand, the institutional framework underlying the supervisory functions needs to be reinforced. Supervisory authorities need to be made more independent, i.e. more capable of slowing down the music. They also need to cooperate more with each other, because it is no good slowing down the music in some jurisdictions if it continues to run fast in others. Finally, we need a system that will monitor and assess internationally the activities performed by the supervisory authorities, one which will strengthen both cooperation and accountability. Let me conclude. The current crisis has been characterised by many as a crisis of capitalism. I wonder whether it might also be a crisis of our democratic system, a challenge to its ability to manage complex and global financial markets. Indeed, many parts of society benefited from the loose approach to supervision and regulation of the financial activities which took place in the run-up to the turmoil. Market participants have been short sighted, and so have the political authorities and institutions. Can this crisis convince them to look further ahead? Can we expect the longer-term interests of society to prevail once again over short-term incentives which led to instability? The signals coming everyday from several financial market participants as well as political authorities do not seem so encouraging. The former are waiting for the dust to settle and for things to return to ‘normal’. The latter can only be as far-sighted as those they represent, i.e. those who elect them. What is really needed then, to quote that famous phrase, is somebody who will “ take the punch bowl away just as the party gets going” again; somebody who has the authority to slow the music down. I am fully aware that this is not easily done, but it is not impossible. It took the high inflation of the 1970s to convince the political authorities that monetary policy should be implemented by independent central banks. It would be better not to ‘waste’ another crisis to come to the same conclusion for financial stability. [1]  Interview with the BBC on 10 September 2009.[2]  R. Posner ‘A Failure of Capitalism’, Harvard University Press, 2009.[3]  Interview with the Financial Times, 10 July 2007.[4]  Gillian Tett, ‘Fool’s Gold’, Little Brown, 2009.[5]  R. Rajan and L. Zingales, ‘Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists’, Princeton University Press, 2003.[6]  Angela Merkel also said, in Linz on 20 September 2008: “Financial products have to meet certain standards and be easier to understand…you also have to know [in respect of those products] what you are dealing with. Otherwise things happen for which we all have to pay.”[7]  Data refer to the total assets of Bear Stearns, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Merrill Lynch and Lehman Brothers. Data are reported until Q1 2008, i.e. when Bear Stearns was taken over by JP Morgan.[8]  Source: Lipper TASS.[9]  Essential Information and Consumer Education Foundation, ‘Sold Out: How Wall Street and Washington Betrayed America’, March 2009 (www.wallstreetwatch.org).[10]  S. Johnson, “The Quiet Coup”, The Atlantic, May 2009.[11]  C. Freeland, “Investors had little choice but to keep on dancing”, Financial Times, 8 October 2009. [12]  L. Bini Smaghi, “Independence and Accountability of Supervision in the European Financial Market”, Bocconi University, March 2006.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",sinc financi crisi erupt lack opportun put trial peopl presum respons upheav recent time banker take excess risk regul supervis banker rate agenc mispric risk central banker creat much cheap money economist forese crisi journalist turn crisi drama call account may use understand went wrong must done put system right tempt regard culprit escap blame accus finger turn system capit fault system improv mani initi way end includ inher unstabl element live one exampl posit reflect comment made bbc alan greenspan former chairman us feder reserv crisi happen differ crise differ one fundament sourc unquench capabl human be confront long period prosper presum continu word human natur drive fast limit accid inevit tri make less serious fit stronger brake car give airbag improv road analog frequent use explain financi crisi suggest sinc realli avoid new crise rather tri reduc impact enhanc defenc tougher regul effect supervisori mechan book failur capit richard posner one lead ideologu advoc free market offer critiqu capitalist system view root crisi lie explos mix expans monetari polici excess deregul mix caus financi oper take risk magnitud greater could manag posner goe one step claim made misjudg particular financi oper knew riski could even lead crisi although weren abl estim scope posner write believ financi crisi result stupid irrate crimin even ignor think even consum bought hous mortgag could afford knew specul unreason continu rise hous price add believ senior execut major bank awar might least small probabl bankruptci result risk take alan greenspan must known mani senior execut seem opinion bbc interview said banker knew involv underpr risk point correct would made view seem confirm memor comment made chuck princ former chairman ceo citigroup summer day crisi broke long music play ve got get danc re still danc remark believ symptomat crisi also key understand often quot perhap suffici analys seem support posner argument manag big bank knew taken major risk ventur activ rather like game music chair manag well awar sooner later music would stop race remain chair would start didn know mani chair would left far away would knew time music would finish evid expect hope beat other chair confid expect base assumpt profit financi institut would also resist abrupt stop music assumpt link yardstick measur financi sector word profit one bank capabl anoth thus worth earn anoth space five six year period three month trader capabl anoth earn bank result earn bank plus manag made larg profit past would feel justifi regard capabl other would continu think like even foresaw crisi consid want consid profit larger bank taken risk risk would slow rush empti chair music stop anoth interest detail chuck princ comment use verb got ve got get danc princ seem suggest altern extern forc push bank along other take risk seem difficult believ difficult book fool gold gillian tett explain continu comparison result various bank even insid bank various team result base profit obtain encourag bank employe take ever greater risk order obtain better result report intern discuss invest bank tett write anoth record year bank world largest invest bank collect rais revenu usd billion time howev jpmorgan chase produc modest result jpmorgan time bank reconsid enter mortgag cdo cds game p quot confirm banker well awar want make bank profit increas degre risk join game word enter casino make mistak consid pervers system incent limit bank world end sharehold saver demand better return invest saver larg small want fund manag bank pension fund invest fund beat competit benchmark rate return save bring poorer return other invest return higher fund manag tri anticip shift replac less effect personnel obtain better result even take greater risk profit maximis entrepreneur drive capit best way reward invest therebi promot longterm econom growth assumpt under theoret model use analys econom develop also consist kind human incent greenspan posner refer literatur analys perfect competit product labour market ensur benefit growth distribut among market particip ideal world perfect competit profit margin invest tend zero resourc fulli exploit howev know realiti fulli competit market inde sometim even entrepreneur take strong action prevent market oper condit perfect competit book save capit capitalist rajan zingal explain well inher contradict market economi name entrepreneur benefit regul reduc competit maximis rent entrepreneur thus incent lobbi legisl adopt regul aim increas barrier entri legisl tend redistribut welfar consum produc also reduc overal demand invest thus econom growth excess regul aim safeguard ineffici monopolist rent caus economi stagnat lead rajan zingal argu capit produc benefit must put strong barrier also polit level reflex capitalist overregul market barrier encourag wave deregul spread advanc emerg market economi mid reason appli financ mayb without understand financi servic quit special differ product differ becom even difficult understand crisi like german chancellor angela merkel ask buy product know buy buy financi product know mani us probabl wonder tri understand caus crisi answer twofold first buy financi product definit buy risk want preserv nomin valu save hold cash return invest compens inher risk asset acquir word valu financi instrument uncertain subject risk greater risk greater return second part answer alway easi assess risk anyon enter transact make assess may vari probabl specif event default counterparti also probabl event affect instanc asset held portfolio investor import buyer seller may valu risk asset differ might differ inform asset characterist particular seller mean origin asset tend inform buyer former hide inform particular risk asset sell higher price word rate return cover intrins risk asset differ financi product product relev individu also societi earlier mention world perfect competit industri attract invest thus grow margin profit brought zero assum seller buyer abl assess price good servic exchang buyer believ good higher qualiti realli buy larger quantiti given price thus increas sale profit compani sell product word investor think financi asset less riski realli buy higher amount profit financi industri increas mean risk undervalu investor greater profit opportun financi industri greater scope expand particular financi innov may hide inher asymmetri inform push argument competit environ incent financi industri increas asymmetri inform increas revenu profit way sum market economi natur tendenc produc consum financi asset excess degre may destabilis economi key differ compar sector economi inher asymmetri inform under relationship produc consum financi instrument regul need preserv sound stabl financi market financi incent diametr oppos capitalist consid rajan zingal latter regul better protect incumb extern competit thus maximis monopolist rent incumb readi lobbi regul legisl increas regulatori barrier protect rent regulatori pressur abat potenti extern competitor consum mobilis suffici resourc forc counter lobbi financi industri way round outsid subject regul becom profit insid abl sell investor highrisk asset return appear offer disproportion reward financi regul protect incumb outsid competit unlik industri instead prevent insid conduct profit riski busi practic outsid perform nonregul sector consid detail nonregul financi sector grown becom profit regul one opposit happen real economi asymmetr inform heart matter real economi inventor product protect intellectu properti invest product seek copyright product distribut sale plan basi protect financi system thing copyright product protect copyright exist cdos clos clss swap etc financi instrument financi institut balanc sheet cannot perfect transpar would destroy busi success fund manag oblig fulli disclos invest strategi other would immedi would go busi financi regul intend primarili prevent opaqu riski product produc financi institut sold saver year howev shadow bank system unregul develop aim produc sell kind product normal avail regul market trend toler regul highrisk financi product develop purchas wealthi institut individu suppos understand risk deal moreov institut develop product consid system import thought failur would jeopardis stabil financi system hedg fund left unregul even collaps ltcm event rais alarm shadow financi system relat small end past decad grown enorm particular hedg fund invest bank specul activ tradit bank sector also develop exponenti let give figur total asset five major us invest bank percentag us gdp increas q q global hedg fund industri capit manag went usd billion usd trillion q q stagger increas basic two factor behind develop first alreadi mention higher profit nonregul financi sector compar regul one push former enter aggress latter busi quot taken gillian tett book quit tell respect higher profit nonregul sector attract attent regul one tri equip enter higherrisk busi particular origin distribut highrisk product particular offbal sheet vehicl regul institut enter highrisk busi less profit busi becam greater competit turn creat incent nonregul sector innov creat sophist product often sophist institut mention increas competit financ tend promot risktak thus potenti instabl know solut problem regul bring second factor behind develop shadow bank system lack regul even deregul system ten year lead crisi burgeon shadow bank system left unregul also tradit bank system deregul allow enter busi reserv shadow bank us offer bestknown exampl deregul repeal glasssteagal act remov barrier commerci invest bank consequ latter start oper tradit bank busi although subject supervis feder reserv particular invest bank enter mortgag busi develop portfolio repackag resold cdos instrument result commerci bank came greater competit pressur probabl felt enter riskier kind busi lack regul regard sever compon financi system highlight number report activ system import instanc subject form regul exampl lack transpar otc deriv busi lack oversight hedg fund mention shortcom moreov narrow focus regul exist relat tradit commerci bank encourag transfer part busi unregul entiti balanc sheet thus exploit gap account framework happen key question must answer want build better system plug leak let start suggest happen clear decis regul shadow bank system deregul financi industri taken deliber undeni interest shadow bank system regul also interest bank system deregul increas profit financi sector middl decad reach corpor profit us doubl averag previous forti year also use lobbi polit author regul aim reduc regul supervis recent public two nonprofit organis essenti inform consum educ foundat estim period usd billion spent financi institut includ bank invest bank hedg fund insur compani etc campaign contribut lobbi activ us congress administr order get rid larg part financi regul enact great depress outcom iron lobbi end sow seed biggest econom financi crisi sinc great depress report detail draft bill push deregul forward intern competit financi sector doubt led legisl various countri particular europ compet order secur level play field turn lower lower term regulatori constraint verit race bottom lobbyist even grant digniti recent year legisl made custom consult industri whenev new regulatori better say deregulatori initi propos ensur interest parti could express view influenc legisl asymmetri inform play role also relationship typic financi market particip greater knowledg financi product subject regul polit author regul better assess explain reason includ advantag would obtain deregul thus help implement best interest hold regul polit author captiv financi industri one main factor under deregulatori process regulatori delay recent year sum downward spiral creat increas profit financi sector year encourag lobbi deregul industri lead still greater profit even lobbi pressur reason ask contrarian forc emerg tri stop spiral one reason beneficiari deregul develop shadow bank system quit divers sharehold benefit search higher yield bank abl enter profit albeit riski busi compani benefit develop sophist financi product allow risk securitis thus reduc burden debt rate agenc benefit develop new sophist instrument attribut synthet rate even gave advic bank develop instrument household benefit develop financi instrument allow borrow cheapli order buy consum good hous difficult imagin anyon goldilock scenario loser except mayb financi institut oper cautious play game word loser danc mani peopl benefit system polit author could benefit encourag acquiesc increas quot recent articl simon johnson everyon get richer health nation economi depend heavili growth real estat financ one washington incent question go someth went wrong bound go wrong system incent led econom agent search higher higher yield even cost reduc regul permit unregul activ thus made instabl inevit sooner later describ might consid anoth way characteris refer human factor made particular greenspan ration behaviour mention richard posner chain incent investor institut supervisor politician lead societi take upon greater degre risk privat public natur alan greenspan said unless somebodi find way chang human natur crise none look like two crise anyth common except human natur clear warn want give impress human natur cannot chang hope crisi thought lesson problem interconnected financi system make vulner behaviour less compet learn lesson danger come good dancer use chuck princ analog good dancer alway find seat music end danger come bad dancer especi believ good other embark pirouett eventu stumbl make other fall music stop function market bound affect particip taken excess risk relat abil manag repres danger system drunken driver repres danger safe driver hope crisi also convinc difficult imposs market particip selfregul way would produc less riski environ financi system self regul work market particip agre worst dancer alway incent agre deviat regul order abl deliv similar return condit regul impos author outsid financi market inde interest market particip taxpay power regul establish author courag slow music everyon initi taken last month particular g fsb imf aim fix problem gave rise crisi won go initi measur commit made well known import necessari nevertheless ask whether suffici tackl caus crisi must ask whether current status supervisori author inde power slow music consid essenti safeguard financi stabil know pressur deregul mount soon crisi financ huge profit financi sector generat theoret question far distant futur well known strong forc play right speak minimis chang regulatori framework propos crisi forc grow crisi reced give exampl octob financi time frontpag headlin top banker launch fightback fear regulatori overkil articl report discuss annual meet institut intern financ roundtabl discuss imfworld bank annual meet istanbul recent heard comment often made financi market particip realli need new regul everyth appli true real question supervisori author made full use exist regul particular discretionari element allow second pillar basel ii framework answer supervisori author put extrem pressur financi industri market particip even polit author use discretionari power would cut profit bank system capit intern mobil financi compani tend penalis countri supervis tougher move fund oper supervis lighter crisi shown countri incur lowest cost crisi supervisori author stabil top prioriti implement regul discret avail one exampl use dynam provis capit spain contrast sever countri supervisori author opt light approach pressur polit author requir promot domest financi system taxpay paid heavi price cost regulatori supervisori failur born resid countri concern also countri result crisi principl home countri supervis assign respons supervisori author countri bank incorpor viabl confid foreign supervisori bodi trust good job held captiv industri polit author without confid singl market cannot surviv address issu let mention three area view make progress essenti want establish effici supervisori structur better protect system futur crise first area concern independ supervisor mention root crisi regulatori polit captur supervisor lead favour shortterm prioriti mediumterm stabil noth new examin notabl literatur time inconsist optim polici decisionmak system close associ polit institut tend bias toward short term politician inevit induc aim achiev someth visibl constitu term offic obvious elector reason tempt pursu polici like shortterm impact may counterproduct medium term way elector cycl discourag adopt polici benefit societi time horizon goe beyond elector mandat entail hardship endur shortterm pain rule longerterm gain case point monetari polici implement policymak account constitu short term pursu two contrast object inflat growth result might high expansionari polici excess inflat solut creat countri independ central bank charg monetari polici clear defin object e price stabil happen peopl react negat say key aspect econom polici left unelect technocrat benefit hindsight today would overturn decis year independ central bank kept price stabl cost econom growth supervisor made independ central bank case least oper point view task assign central bank supervis conduct independ central bank proven resist regulatori captur polit pressur make supervisori author fulli independ bit complic monetari policymak object supervis cannot easili turn benchmark simpl percentag inflat rate financi stabil becam sole object supervisori author result might excess regul prevent failur bank monetari polici primari object price stabil rule secondari object pursu without infring primari one supervisor primari object promot stabil financi system domest global secondari object could also foreseen entail particular effici anoth constraint independ supervisori author one often mention polici discuss decis may impact taxpay requir control govern author person believ argument flaw misplac conduct monetari polici lender last resort function independ central bank also take decis affect taxpay way might even relev supervisori author take decis instanc assess solvenc institut deni better societi decis taken independ bodi assess fair way option avail handl insolv bank present option fiscal author dwell longer issu certain deserv thought second area progress need concern intern cooper supervisor broad consensus issu certain much progress achiev last month howev area devil detail see within european union creation three supervisori agenc propos de larosièr report current discuss council attempt limit scope cooper avoid interfer nation compet never far away progress made creation colleg supervisor exist major bank howev intermedi step mani memorandum understand necessarili guarante level play field supervisori function presenc european agenc repres colleg current propos would repres first step toward ensur consist supervisori approach third area refer account supervisor supervis supervisor account current establish nation level often state nation taxpay pick bill word nation polit author repres taxpay charg assess activ supervisor howev current crisi shown taxpay pick bill institut better supervis foreign supervisori author global financi system domest polit author cannot realli ensur account domest supervisor anoth constraint current system deriv complex activ perform supervisori author make exercis account quit difficult especi nonexpert unlik monetari polici effect summaris statist supervisori activ cannot reduc number institut supervis fail number warn issu current miss system expert intern monitor assess activ perform supervisori author institut like imf oecd european commiss eu charg monitor assess perform central bank fiscal author govern general way respect wide rang polici activ supervis fall within realm intern cooper forum supervisori author hold discuss order achiev converg supervisori practic exchang inform perform function independ assess function perform asian crisi g agre entrust imf financi sector assess program countri assess resili financi system advanc emerg economi asid fact countri particip assess snapshot current situat would need period evalu activ perform supervisori author major countri order assess independ also way carri function assess would great benefit nation polit author supervisor account sum current initi strengthen regulatori framework essenti hand institut framework under supervisori function need reinforc supervisori author need made independ e capabl slow music also need cooper good slow music jurisdict continu run fast other final need system monitor assess intern activ perform supervisori author one strengthen cooper account let conclud current crisi characteris mani crisi capit wonder whether might also crisi democrat system challeng abil manag complex global financi market inde mani part societi benefit loos approach supervis regul financi activ took place runup turmoil market particip short sight polit author institut crisi convinc look ahead expect longerterm interest societi prevail shortterm incent led instabl signal come everyday sever financi market particip well polit author seem encourag former wait dust settl thing return normal latter farsight repres e elect realli need quot famous phrase somebodi take punch bowl away parti get go somebodi author slow music fulli awar easili done imposs took high inflat convinc polit author monetari polici implement independ central bank would better wast anoth crisi come conclus financi stabil interview bbc septemb r posner failur capit harvard univers press interview financi time juli gillian tett fool gold littl brown r rajan l zingal save capit capitalist princeton univers press angela merkel also said linz septemb financi product meet certain standard easier understand also know respect product deal otherwis thing happen pay data refer total asset bear stearn goldman sach morgan stanley merril lynch lehman brother data report q e bear stearn taken jp morgan sourc lipper tass essenti inform consum educ foundat sold wall street washington betray america march www wallstreetwatch org johnson quiet coup atlant may c freeland investor littl choic keep danc financi time octob l bini smaghi independ account supervis european financi market bocconi univers march reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en