Jean-Claude Trichet: Intervention at the Eurofi Financial Forum 2011,15-09-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,2212,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen, It is a great pleasure for me to be back here at the Eurofi Financial Forum. These events always provide a very good opportunity to exchange views on issues that are central to the effective functioning of the financial sector and its key task of supporting sustainable growth in the real economy. As we are all well aware, this is a very challenging time for the advanced economies. We avoided a dramatic economic depression in the autumn of 2008 – following the collapse of Lehman Brothers three years ago to this very day. But we still have a long way to go to move beyond this crisis.At the Pittsburgh Summit two years ago, the G20 leaders reiterated their promise to do ‘everything necessary to ensure recovery, to repair our financial systems and to maintain the global flow of capital’. Now, more than ever, we need to make significant progress in delivering on those promises.Today, I would like to focus on what has been achieved so far by our collective efforts to repair our financial systems – in particular, the establishment of the new European supervisory structure, the agreement on Basel III and the global framework for systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs).But I also want to look at the road ahead: we must not stop here and leave our task half-finished. There is still very important work to be done on a number of regulatory challenges. And with all our reforms and with all our new institutions of economic and financial governance, we must ensure timely implementation so that we can ensure that we have done everything to make a difference as regards the resilience of the global, regional and national financial systems. Let me start with some of our accomplishments before moving on to highlight some key areas where we need to make progress. The first accomplishment is the establishment of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) earlier this year. As you know, the ESRB brings together the policy makers such as central banks, supervisors and the Commission, thus fostering a broad-based review of risks and vulnerabilities and a deeper understanding of interlinkages and spillovers between different parts of the financial system. This wide-ranging perspective, which encompasses both micro and macro elements, is an essential feature of the new European supervisory framework and it fills a gap identified at the global level. Although the ESRB does not have direct binding powers, the effectiveness of its “comply or explain” mechanism builds upon the high reputation of the ESRB’s members and the quality of its analysis. In its last meeting in June, the ESRB underlined the threat to financial stability stemming from the interplay between the vulnerabilities of public finances in certain EU Member States and the banking system, with potential contagion effects across the Union and beyond. To ensure the resilience of the EU financial system and limit the potential for adverse spillovers, the ESRB at the time also stated that backstop plans should exist, starting with resources from private markets and, if necessary, with public funds. As we also said at the time, we are furthermore working on specific issues such as FX lending, complex financial products and mismatches in the funding structure between various currencies. Let me mention that we have our next ESRB General Board meeting next Wednesday. As regards Basel III, compared with Basel II, the new framework envisages higher minimum capital requirements, better risk capture, stricter definition of eligible capital elements and more transparency. These elements should substantially improve banks’ capital position and loss absorbing capacity, thus enhancing the resilience of the financial sector. The new Basel framework also introduces entirely new concepts, such as a non-risk-based leverage ratio and mandatory liquidity requirements. It has been agreed that these measures will be introduced gradually during a transition period. It is essential that prior to their introduction the potential impacts of these new elements on financial markets are carefully assessed to ensure that these measures do not hinder banks providing funding to the real economy.A major challenge ahead is the consistent and timely implementation of the Basel III framework. It is of the essence that we all adhere to the agreed timeline, ensuring that our banks have a strong capital base. Only when implemented in a consistent manner across jurisdictions will the expected significant net social benefits, including reduced volatility of credit and GDP growth as well as the lower probability of occurrence of systemic crises, be achieved. To reap the benefits of the new framework, a consistent implementation of Basel III is essential. In this context, I welcome the European Commission’s proposal on the implementation of Basel III in the EU, issued in July in the form of a fully-fledged capital requirements regulation. With this step, the EU has demonstrated its strong commitment to the rapid implementation of the Basel III agreement. As it was already said earlier in this Eurofi colloquium, great attention is presently given to this very important piece of legislation, to verify and make sure that it is fully in line with the agreements reached at global level through the Basel Committee, the FSB and the G20. I am confident that this work will be satisfactorily concluded. Another important step taken to strengthen the resilience of the financial markets is the agreement reached on global systemically important financial institutions. A key lesson from the crisis is that incentives need to be put in place for banks to reduce their ‘systemic footprint’. So I am very pleased that at end-June this year the Group of Governors and Heads of Supervision, which I had the privilege to chair, adopted the consultative document regarding global systemically important banks. The envisaged measures have several objectives. These objectives include reducing the probability of an adverse event occurring, reducing the extent or impact of the failure of a systemically important bank and reducing the cost to the public sector.The framework is built on two building blocks that increase the loss absorbency of global systemically important banks. The first building block is a gradual capital surcharge based on the degree of systemic importance, ranging from 1% to 2.5 % of risk weighted assets.The second building block is that the additional capital requirements have to be met with common equity. The unambiguous choice of common equity as the unique instrument to meet the capital surcharge should ensure robustness. These measures complemented with supervisory judgement should capture structural and cyclical changes in the banking system. The introduction of more stringent capital requirements for credit institutions under Basel III as well as the requirements for global systemically important banks, may provide incentives for banks to shift part of their activities outside the regulatory perimeter. It is therefore decisive that we continue our work to improve our capacity to identify and assess the potential risks stemming from the shadow banking system.We need to develop a better understanding of the interconnections between regulated and non-regulated entities. We also need to explore the possible channels of contagion that may result in adverse market dynamics. Gaining a better understanding of the functioning of the shadow banking system is a key element of and a precondition for improving the efficiency of financial regulation and supervision across markets and jurisdiction.I strongly encourage the FSB to continue to work very actively on all of its work streams regarding the regulation of the non-banking sector. This includes regulatory reform of money market funds, securitisation and the interaction with the banking sector. I am looking forward to the progress report to be delivered for the G20 meeting in October.In a number of key domains, decisions have been taken by the international community. It is no time to challenge them. It is time to implement. In a crisis period where confidence is of the essence, it would be extremely damaging if the authorities were to hesitate, demonstrate an absence of resolve and of the fortitude that is required by the circumstances. I see resistance of some in the financial sector against Basel III. I see similar messages on the SIFIs. For me, it is crystal clear: what has been decided is decided. But there are other areas of regulatory reform where work is still underway. Let me briefly highlight two key areas on which we need to stay committed and where swift progress is of the essence.First, there is the review of the Markets in Financial Instrument Directive (MiFID), on which a proposal is expected to be released by the European Commission this autumn, will represent a key step in the right direction. Amending the MiFID should enable the EU regulatory framework to keep pace with financial innovation while responding to the G20 commitments to deal with less regulated and more opaque parts of the financial system. Second, it is key that transparency is enhanced across the board: with regard to markets, institutions and products. Lack of information contributes to the mispricing of risks, mistrust among market participants can turn situations into downturns. In order to build confidence and contribute towards the stability of markets it is important that financial innovation and technological advances contribute to the ability of financial markets to sustainably provide financial services to the real economy. We need to establish a harmonised framework that enables coordinated action, increases transparency and reduces the risks posed by these market practices. Moreover, we need to better identify, monitor and assess the potential threat to market stability posed by High Frequency Trading. The IOSCO consultation on Regulatory Issues Raised by the Impact of Technological Changes on Market Integrity, carried out in response to a G20 Leaders request during the Seoul Summit in 2010, recalls that “the benefits from technological advances should not overshadow the risks that these innovations pose to the efficiency and integrity of markets. These changes raise issues that should be addressed by regulators in order to maintain the integrity of financial markets.” IOSCO is currently assessing the responses to this Consultation and steps that could be taken to help mitigate these possible risks. I look forward to the report for the G20 Finance Ministers in October. In conclusion I would like to send these messages and make a comment on the central banks role in present time:  My first message is to underline once again that all what has been decided has to be implemented strictly, comprehensively, and fully. As the continuous challenges demonstrate clearly, we are not back to “business as usual” as some thought some months ago. We need resolve and fortitude of the public authorities and lucidity on the part of the private sector.  Secondly, a lot remains to be done. No complacency should be tolerated in any field. And I cannot help saying that on top of what is clearly identified by the international community as the urgent issues in discussion in the Financial Stability Board, we are far from understanding the potential global systemic instability that is associated today with the sheer size of the non-banking sector which experienced an exponential growth over the last 20 years. I would call all of us to better understand this aspect of the global financial dynamics.  Thirdly, more directly linked to the present tensions in the European sovereign debt, I would only remind all of us that the central banks – and the ECB in particular but with all others – have called permanently for sound fiscal management, sound economic policies and structural reforms, strict implementation and reinforcement of the European economic and fiscal governance—tirelessly, not only in stress times, but also in times of generalised benign neglect of both governments and markets. We call all authorities to implement swiftly all decisions and to be constantly ahead of the curve. As institutions that are independent, that are devoted to stability and that are medium- to long-term oriented, central banks are more than ever an anchor of stability and confidence. This is especially the case in an environment which is turbulent since 4 years, in open crisis of the financial sector since 3 years – shall I say exactly 3 years – and in a market environment characterised by acute tensions of some sovereign signatures in the advanced economies since one year and a half. It is exactly what is inspiring the Governing Council and the General Council of the ECB: to offer the most solid anchor of stability possible to all economic agents and, overall, to our own people. For in very difficult times, all depends on the confidence of our fellow citizens. It is what is inspiring the 27 central banks of the European Union. It is what is inspiring the sister central banks in all the world. We are just coming from Basel, the BIS headquarters. Reporting to the press on the Global Economy Meeting, I stressed that we were all very closely “united in purpose”: each of us in our own economy, with their different features and challenges, striving to solidly anchor inflation expectations, preserve stability and consolidate confidence. The globally co-ordinated decision we published this afternoon on US dollar liquidity-providing operations is a clear illustration of our very close cooperation at the global level and of the “unity in purpose” that I was mentioning last Monday. I thank you very much for your attention. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur back eurofi financi forum event alway provid good opportun exchang view issu central effect function financi sector key task support sustain growth real economi well awar challeng time advanc economi avoid dramat econom depress autumn follow collaps lehman brother three year ago day still long way go move beyond crisi pittsburgh summit two year ago g leader reiter promis everyth necessari ensur recoveri repair financi system maintain global flow capit ever need make signific progress deliv promis today would like focus achiev far collect effort repair financi system particular establish new european supervisori structur agreement basel iii global framework system import financi institut sifi also want look road ahead must stop leav task halffinish still import work done number regulatori challeng reform new institut econom financi govern must ensur time implement ensur done everyth make differ regard resili global region nation financi system let start accomplish move highlight key area need make progress first accomplish establish european system risk board esrb earlier year know esrb bring togeth polici maker central bank supervisor commiss thus foster broadbas review risk vulner deeper understand interlinkag spillov differ part financi system widerang perspect encompass micro macro element essenti featur new european supervisori framework fill gap identifi global level although esrb direct bind power effect compli explain mechan build upon high reput esrb member qualiti analysi last meet june esrb underlin threat financi stabil stem interplay vulner public financ certain eu member state bank system potenti contagion effect across union beyond ensur resili eu financi system limit potenti advers spillov esrb time also state backstop plan exist start resourc privat market necessari public fund also said time furthermor work specif issu fx lend complex financi product mismatch fund structur various currenc let mention next esrb general board meet next wednesday regard basel iii compar basel ii new framework envisag higher minimum capit requir better risk captur stricter definit elig capit element transpar element substanti improv bank capit posit loss absorb capac thus enhanc resili financi sector new basel framework also introduc entir new concept nonriskbas leverag ratio mandatori liquid requir agre measur introduc gradual transit period essenti prior introduct potenti impact new element financi market care assess ensur measur hinder bank provid fund real economi major challeng ahead consist time implement basel iii framework essenc adher agre timelin ensur bank strong capit base implement consist manner across jurisdict expect signific net social benefit includ reduc volatil credit gdp growth well lower probabl occurr system crise achiev reap benefit new framework consist implement basel iii essenti context welcom european commiss propos implement basel iii eu issu juli form fullyfledg capit requir regul step eu demonstr strong commit rapid implement basel iii agreement alreadi said earlier eurofi colloquium great attent present given import piec legisl verifi make sure fulli line agreement reach global level basel committe fsb g confid work satisfactorili conclud anoth import step taken strengthen resili financi market agreement reach global system import financi institut key lesson crisi incent need put place bank reduc system footprint pleas endjun year group governor head supervis privileg chair adopt consult document regard global system import bank envisag measur sever object object includ reduc probabl advers event occur reduc extent impact failur system import bank reduc cost public sector framework built two build block increas loss absorb global system import bank first build block gradual capit surcharg base degre system import rang risk weight asset second build block addit capit requir met common equiti unambigu choic common equiti uniqu instrument meet capit surcharg ensur robust measur complement supervisori judgement captur structur cyclic chang bank system introduct stringent capit requir credit institut basel iii well requir global system import bank may provid incent bank shift part activ outsid regulatori perimet therefor decis continu work improv capac identifi assess potenti risk stem shadow bank system need develop better understand interconnect regul nonregul entiti also need explor possibl channel contagion may result advers market dynam gain better understand function shadow bank system key element precondit improv effici financi regul supervis across market jurisdict strong encourag fsb continu work activ work stream regard regul nonbank sector includ regulatori reform money market fund securitis interact bank sector look forward progress report deliv g meet octob number key domain decis taken intern communiti time challeng time implement crisi period confid essenc would extrem damag author hesit demonstr absenc resolv fortitud requir circumst see resist financi sector basel iii see similar messag sifi crystal clear decid decid area regulatori reform work still underway let briefli highlight two key area need stay commit swift progress essenc first review market financi instrument direct mifid propos expect releas european commiss autumn repres key step right direct amend mifid enabl eu regulatori framework keep pace financi innov respond g commit deal less regul opaqu part financi system second key transpar enhanc across board regard market institut product lack inform contribut mispric risk mistrust among market particip turn situat downturn order build confid contribut toward stabil market import financi innov technolog advanc contribut abil financi market sustain provid financi servic real economi need establish harmonis framework enabl coordin action increas transpar reduc risk pose market practic moreov need better identifi monitor assess potenti threat market stabil pose high frequenc trade iosco consult regulatori issu rais impact technolog chang market integr carri respons g leader request seoul summit recal benefit technolog advanc overshadow risk innov pose effici integr market chang rais issu address regul order maintain integr financi market iosco current assess respons consult step could taken help mitig possibl risk look forward report g financ minist octob conclus would like send messag make comment central bank role present time first messag underlin decid implement strict comprehens fulli continu challeng demonstr clear back busi usual thought month ago need resolv fortitud public author lucid part privat sector second lot remain done complac toler field cannot help say top clear identifi intern communiti urgent issu discuss financi stabil board far understand potenti global system instabl associ today sheer size nonbank sector experienc exponenti growth last year would call us better understand aspect global financi dynam third direct link present tension european sovereign debt would remind us central bank ecb particular other call perman sound fiscal manag sound econom polici structur reform strict implement reinforc european econom fiscal govern tireless stress time also time generalis benign neglect govern market call author implement swift decis constant ahead curv institut independ devot stabil medium longterm orient central bank ever anchor stabil confid especi case environ turbul sinc year open crisi financi sector sinc year shall say exact year market environ characteris acut tension sovereign signatur advanc economi sinc one year half exact inspir govern council general council ecb offer solid anchor stabil possibl econom agent overal peopl difficult time depend confid fellow citizen inspir central bank european union inspir sister central bank world come basel bis headquart report press global economi meet stress close unit purpos us economi differ featur challeng strive solid anchor inflat expect preserv stabil consolid confid global coordin decis publish afternoon us dollar liquidityprovid oper clear illustr close cooper global level uniti purpos mention last monday thank much attent reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en