Jürgen Stark: Globalisation and monetary policy: from virtue to vice?,30-11-2011,European Central Bank,ECB,5603,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen [1],I am very honoured to be here today. Reading about the origins of the Globalisation and Monetary Policy Institute, I came to learn that it was established in 2007 in order to promote a deeper understanding of the global environment in which US monetary policy operates. The establishment of the Institute could not have been more timely, as the deep-seated and systemic nature of the current crisis is certain to provide numerous interesting questions for researchers to explore in the years to come. The good news, therefore, is that we live in challenging times and that for those of you who work in the Institute this will mean important and policy relevant work today and in the future. The bad news is that the crisis is still on-going, and insofar as this is the case and its ultimate outcome remains uncertain, there is an inherent peril to provide analysis and possible policy prescriptions on the basis of events which are either happening in real time or have recently elapsed. We have seen many dimensions of the crisis since it started in August 2007, spreading from the periphery of the financial system to its core, and then onto sovereigns with weaker balance sheets, which in turn contributed to increasing the vulnerability of the core financial system even further. In recent months, this negative and self-reinforcing dynamic of adverse feedback loops between weak sovereign and financial sector balance sheets has been all too apparent in parts of the euro area. At every step of this process entailing the transformation of risk from one party to another, policymakers in various domains – regulatory, financial, fiscal, monetary – had to search for workable solutions. At a minimum, the evolving character of the crisis has forced policy makers to work on an effective response under exigent circumstances. In the remainder of my remarks today, I would like to shed light on the on-going policy response from the point of view of a monetary policy practitioner in a central bank. I will do this by drawing on the relationship between globalisation and monetary policy in recent years and considering the extent to which both variables have influenced each other in either a ‘virtuous’ or ‘vicious’ manner. This will not only be useful to understand what has happened in the recent period but also to frame the challenges that might lie before us as a result of the changed global environment under which monetary policy must operate. Before going any further, I think two disclaimers are in order. First, I will not purport to be exhaustive but selective in my discussion of the factors conditioning monetary policy frameworks in the global environment. Second, I do not intend to be taxative but reflective, as the assessment of monetary policy frameworks will necessarily continue even if the aftermath of the crisis.The road to virtue between globalisation and monetary policy was built on two inter-related premises. First, that the process of globalisation itself was largely irreversible. And second, that the by-products of such a process complemented improvements in monetary policymaking such that the battles of yesteryear had been decisively won in a durable manner and the new challenges appeared to be manageable. The relationship between monetary policy and globalisation could thus be best described as one which was both symbiotic in nature and mutually beneficial. I will review these arguments in turn. The perceived inevitability of globalisation First, asserting the irreversibility of globalisation in the midst of a systemic crisis such as the one we are currently experiencing may seem far-fetched. However, if one were to look back at the enthusiasm which prevailed in both the economics and international relations fields during the early 1990s, this appeared as an inescapable conclusion. The growth of world merchandise export volumes had already consistently outpaced that of real GDP for decades [2], while the world stock of outward FDI had dramatically increased in the period from 1980-1990 [3]. These favourable trends looked set to receive a further boost on account of the expected integration of central and eastern European economies as well as the states of the former Soviet Union and China into the mainstream of the world economy. Many observers therefore agreed with Francis Fukuyama that this marked ‘the end of history’ [4].The intensified scope and depth of economic and financial exchanges in the global economy which followed seemed to confirm this premise. But ‘globalisation’ as a concept was – and remains – elusive to define even within the narrower remit of economics and finance, such that observers interpreted these developments in a slightly different manner. On the one hand, theorists such as Ohmae (1990) [5] tended to focus on the globalisation of production and the shifts in global finance that underpinned this trend to argue that a new capitalist system would progressively emerge, with the relevance of nation states as economic actors dwindling in importance. In contrast, other observers saw the growing internationalisation of the world economy as part of a broader and longer-dated trend where sharp intensifications in trade and financial exchanges underpinned by growing economic liberalism were not without historical precedent (for example during the period ranging from 1870 to 1913) [6]. These observers were thus more bullish as regards the ability of nation states to retain their economic power going forward, consolidating this inter alia through strategic alliances in economic blocks [7]. In spite of these nuances, the common thread between the two views was that the underlying economic forces were seen as inevitable in the international (or global) domain.Complementarities between globalised economic performance and policymakingSecond, following the broad acceptance of the premise that the globalised world would be durable in nature, academics and policymakers devoted their attention to fleshing out the practical implications of globalisation in different policy environments. Insofar as monetary policy was concerned, the debate was broadly captured by the relative weight of improved policymaking versus globalised factors in accounting for successful economic outcomes. A first dimension in this regard was backward looking in nature and stemmed from the sharp reduction in the variability of both inflation and output during the 1990s. This phenomenon, which became known as ‘the great moderation’, coincided with both the intensification of globalisation in its broadest possible interpretation (namely the growth of cross-border trade in goods, services and financial assets, complemented by improvements in information and technology transfer) as well as with the establishment of price stability-oriented monetary policy frameworks under independent central banks. In principle, each of these factors could help to account for improved macroeconomic performance. On the one hand, globalisation and the associated increase in international flows of capital, goods and services should have resulted in greater pressure towards price equalisation and convergence as well as greater shock resilience of our economies. On the other hand, an independent and price stability oriented monetary policymaking should contribute to overall greater macroeconomic stability with lower output and inflation volatility. A debate ensued among policymakers and academics to assess the relative merits and contributions of globalisation and monetary policy for macroeconomic stability, with some also suggesting that the improved macroeconomic performance was only accidental in nature reflecting ‘good luck’ [8]. I will not try to settle this debate today, which is bound to continue in both academic and policy quarters, although – not surprising for a central banker - I personally believe that monetary policymakers deserve significant credit to this end, not least as inflation is ultimately a monetary phenomenon and hence ultimately determined by monetary policy. But the more fundamental point which I would like to make is that there seemed to be a large degree of positive complementary between globalisation outcomes and monetary policymaking. Whether one thought that policy frameworks largely managed to keep inflation in check once it was already low with the aid of global factors, or alternatively considered that the low inflation responded to policy frameworks successfully harnessing the forces of globalisation, both trends appeared to be working in the same ‘virtuous’ direction.A second dimension of the debate involving monetary policymaking in a globalised environment was more forward-looking in nature, relating to the perceived ability of monetary authorities to continue to deliver on their price stability mandates. The main concerns in this regard had to do with the possible effects of globalisation in domestic product and labour markets as well as financial conditions, and the extent to which these should be incorporated into the central bank’s reaction function so as to ensure the effectiveness of monetary policy in a changed environment. As regards product and labour markets, observers differed on whether from a theoretical vantagepoint globalisation should make the short run Phillips curve either (i) steeper as a result of greater price responsiveness to shifts in demand (e.g. Rogoff 2006 [9]); or (ii) flatter as a result of other factors including increased openness reducing the responsiveness of inflation to the domestic output gap or squeezed profit margins due to competition from labour abundant countries (e.g. Bean 2006 [10]). Yet other observers (e.g. Taylor 2008 [11]) argued that the correlation between globalisation and the sort of effects which were purported to have on policy response functions were spurious in nature. Empirical studies (e.g. Borio and Filardo, 2007 [12]) showed some support for a flattening of the Phillips curve and that measures of global slack had become relatively more important to account for domestic inflation relative to domestic ones, albeit not in the case of the euro area. The integration of low cost and labour abundant producers such as China into the global system led to the common perception that such emerging markets were ‘exporting deflation’. This view, however, downplayed the cost-push factor which those same emerging markets could have on relative prices, for example through rising demand for commodities, working their way into short-run fluctuations of headline inflation. Therefore, it is clear that the widespread presumption of favourable ‘tail-winds’ from globalisation on inflation is turning more and more into ‘head-winds’ posing challenges to the maintenance of price stability. In addition, policymakers can choose to act to dampen the effect of these relative price changes on the absolute price level to the extent that they are able to distinguish between temporary shocks and permanent inflation trends.Concerning financial globalisation, the main source of concern for policymakers in the run-up to the crisis stemmed from the potential impact of more integrated financial markets on the monetary policy transmission mechanism, for example by increasing the sensitivity of investors to (now lower) interest rate differentials. From a theoretical point of view, some observers argued that key determinants of long-term interest rates - such as the global riskless real rate of interest and the real risk premium – had indeed been influenced by the globalised environment [13].In these circumstances, the ability of short-term interest rate changes to influence long-term rates could be more problematic than would otherwise be the case. There was some empirical evidence pointing to this end for a number of advanced economies including the euro area [14], as well as to suggest that global factors had become increasingly important in the determination of national real bond yields [15]. At the same time, there was also some evidence to suggest that the responsiveness of longer-term yields to unanticipated changes in short-term rates remained unhindered [16]. Public remarks by policymakers in the run-up to the crisis show that officials were cognisant of the increased challenges for monetary policy brought about by financial globalisation. The remarks by former Federal Reserve Chairman Greenspan noting that the diverging evolution of short-term versus long-term rates in the US represented a ‘policy conundrum’ [17] received ample media attention in this regard. In a speech in March 2007, current Federal Reserve Chairman Bernanke also acknowledged that the central bank’s analysis of financial and economic conditions was becoming more complex [18]. Former ECB vice-President Papademos noted similar challenges to the central bank’s monetary analysis in another speech in June 2007 [19]. However, these same public interventions also show that policymakers at either side of the Atlantic remained confident on the ability of monetary policy to continue to effectively transmit monetary impulses to financial markets and the real economy, notably through well-anchored inflation expectations, effective communication, and medium-term orientation of monetary policies.Overall, the ‘virtuous’ view of the relationship between globalisation and monetary policy prevailing in the run-up to the crisis was one where the potential challenges to policy frameworks posed by more integrated product, labour or financial markets appeared to be manageable. This view was partly conditioned by the favourable experience during ‘the great moderation’, with stability oriented monetary policymaking and globalisation trends seemingly complementing each other to yield a stable macroeconomic environment. As we now know, the ‘virtuous’ view of the relationship between globalisation and monetary policy came to an abrupt end in September 2008 as a result of the Lehman bankruptcy and the events which have followed to the present day. With the benefit of hindsight, it has become evident that while policymakers in different areas of the economy thought to have things under control, a ‘perfect storm’ was simmering beneath the surface. The policy failures in many domains, notably supervisory and regulatory regimes as well as risk management and compensation practices by financial institutions, were significant in the run-up to the crisis. And once the crisis hit and public balance sheets were burdened with the respective costs of supporting financial sectors, fiscal stimulus and the operation of automatic stabilisers in a sharp economic downturn, other vulnerabilities emerged.However, it is legitimate to ask about the relative responsibility of monetary authorities in contributing to the crisis, whether actively or inactively. I would thus like to highlight three elements which helped to sow the seeds of a vicious relationship in this regard. Complacency and insufficient medium-term orientation of monetary policyThe first was complacency. With inflation seemingly under control following ‘the great moderation’ of the 1990s amid intensified globalisation, many observers thought that monetary policy had greater degrees of freedom to devote to short-term demand management. Proponents of this view referred to this as ‘fine-tuning’ [20], whose theoretical counterpart was a form of ‘flexible inflation targeting’ with an added emphasis on output stabilisation beyond inflation stabilisation. The pre-crisis focus on the output gap was in many ways paradoxical insofar as consensus macroeconomics had run full circle back to the intellectual climate of the 1970s, where policymakers’ exaggerated real time measures of economic slack was at the root of many policy failures. This was the same environment that had favoured the Great Inflation.Too much emphasis on short run economic developments, or – in my view – an insufficient medium-term orientation of monetary policies has certainly contributed in part to the build-up of monetary and financial imbalances. Although monetary policy frameworks oriented towards the medium-term could probably not have completely prevented the current crisis, I am convinced that they would have helped to make it less disruptive. As you know, the ECB has never subscribed to the view that monetary policy has a primary role to play in the management of aggregate demand and we think that this element of the pre-crisis monetary policy paradigm should be revised on the basis of subsequent events.Underappreciation of monetary and credit dynamicsA second element fostering a vicious relationship between monetary policy and globalisation in recent years was the underappreciation of monetary and credit dynamics on the part of policymakers. In hindsight, the crisis has been a sober reminder that the seeds of financial instability are often alike, including high leverage, rapid growth of financial institutions, and balance sheet mismatches. Some of these trends can be picked up when closely looking at monetary and credit variables, even if such trends may not be addressed by conventional monetary policy tools and require macro-prudential action instead. As you know, liquidity and money lie at the core of the ECB’s second pillar in its monetary policy strategy, but this emphasis was seen by mainstream modellers as somewhat of a relic of the past. However, the crisis has shown that liquidity and various definitions of money are critical elements in the transmission mechanism. The use of these indicators at the ECB has proved useful during the crisis, for example by providing insights into bank behaviour, financing conditions and the overall state of the business cycle (Papademos and Stark 2010) [21]. There is evidence to suggest that, without taking such monetary analysis into account, inflation in the euro area would have been distinctly higher at times of financial exuberance and would have fallen deep into negative territory in the wake of the financial markets’ collapse [22]. We thus think that this is one reason to revisit the role of monetary and credit variables in monetary policy strategies going forward. Moreover, disregard for monetary and financial phenomena by policymakers had a more profound implication insofar as found a theoretical underpinning in the risk management approach to asset price trends. The consensus view in the run-up to the crisis – to which the ECB did not subscribe to - was that the best that central banks could do was to ‘clean-up’ following a bubble burst through a loosening of the monetary policy stance. Subsequent events have shown that these ‘bubble bursts’ can be very costly and that aggressive ex post action may not suffice. This is because the expectation that the central bank will aggressively protect the markets from ‘tail events’ in bad times can encourage markets’ tendency towards risky strategies, over-exposures and exuberance (Stark 2010) [23]. In my view, this asymmetry in responding to shocks where downside risks to the economy received a greater weight in central bankers’ ‘policy preferences’ than upside risks to price stability contributed to the build-up of financial imbalances in some advanced economies. The main ex ante policy tools to prevent such situations from developing in the first place are surely to be found in the regulatory and supervisory domain, which is at times not under the authority of the central bank. However, without prejudice to this, a greater focus on monetary phenomena by central banks through closely scrutinising credit and money developments inspires a ‘leaning-against-the wind’ stance which can help smooth financial cycles and stabilise the economy in the medium term.Confusing ‘known knowns’ with ‘known unknowns’ A third element of vice in the relationship between monetary policy and globalisation in recent years has been the failure of policymakers to think through the possible ways in which they might be called to act as a result of situations which they have helped to bring about. In their well-cited book, Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) make a compelling case to show that financial bubbles throughout history have shared a number of common elements, such as rising home prices and financial innovation. Yet as these authors point out, in spite of these common traits, policymakers have at times fallen prey of the ‘this time is different’ [24] illness. Moreover, the record shows that as far back as 2004 both policymakers and academics were alerting on some of the emerging tail risks which have subsequently materialised. To name a few examples, Borio and White (2004) [25] cautioned on the greater prominence of credit and asset price boom-and-bust cycles even in a low inflation environment; Rajan (2005) [26] did a careful review of some worrying trends associated with globalised financial markets; and Rogoff (2006) [27] noted that the ‘great moderation’ had not been associated with lower asset price volatility. The record also shows that monetary authorities echoed many of these and other concerns (such as the possible disorderly unwinding of global imbalances) in their public discourse, including through speeches and official publications [28]. Thus, even if novel, it is not correct to say that policymakers were unaware of the potential risks associated with a globalised environment.So why did such risks still materialise in the end? Part of the answer was the insufficient policy traction with the authorities that were competent to heed such warnings. However, it is also true that while the onset of the crisis can be largely seen as the result of vulnerabilities and imbalances which had been growing steadily and which had been identified fairly early on in the process, they combined in ways that few would have anticipated. This was especially the case as regards the functioning of the financial system as its wider interconnections. Policymakers thus confused risks which they thought they knew (‘known knowns’) with risks which they knew they didn’t know (‘known unknowns’). This is what the IMF and others have deemed as a ‘failure to connect the dots’ [29]. Insofar as monetary authorities are concerned, this ‘failure to connect the dots’ refers to the unanticipated burdens on central banks resulting from their own contribution to the creation of global excess liquidity and the latter’s role in the development of asset price boom-and-bust cycles. The burst of the bubble and the chain of events set in motion as a result would ultimately reverberate back on central bank activity by impinging on the price stability outlook through severe threats to financial stability. This was the case regardless of whether monetary authorities were formally responsible for safeguarding financial stability or not, which is one reason why monetary policy should systematically incorporate financial analysis into its assessment of the risks to price stability (Moutot and Vitale, 2009) [30]. In addition, threats to price stability through severe strains on governments’ fiscal solvency also arose in some cases. This would call for unprecedented central bank action at the limit of policy mandates in response to exceptional and exigent circumstances. Overall, the seeds of vice in the relationship between monetary policy and globalisation in recent years - including complacency, underappreciation of monetary and credit dynamics and the confusion of ‘known knowns’ with ‘known unknowns’ – have a common thread: the potential for unintended consequences. I would therefore like to outline some of the challenges we may expect in this context in the period ahead.The nature of the relationship between monetary policy and globalisation must be redefined in the period ahead to maintain its virtues while correcting its vices. Let me give you the key policy elements needed for this to be successful. What kind of global system will emerge in the aftermath of the crisis?First, we should not take the process of globalisation for granted. Measures introduced in response to the crisis have in some cases reversed aspects of globalisation. Contrary to the experience of the Great Depression, we have not seen a rise in trade protectionism in recent years. However, we have witnessed a broad-based increase in financial protectionism that is equally if not more worrying. For example, banking systems have been renationalised in some advanced economies, including in the euro area, and other market segmentations have been re-introduced along national lines. If this trend were to be sustained in the future, the euro area could be particularly affected as financial integration is a key aspect for the smooth functioning of monetary union and the broader viability of the single market. Another prominent case of rising financial protectionism in recent years has been the introduction of measures to curb capital inflows in some emerging economies. This was partly done in an effort to contain the fallout from too easy monetary policy in key advanced economies. In their landmark publication, Rajan and Zingales (2003) [31] offer powerful insights into the nature and functioning of financial markets. The authors warn that the establishment might exploit the wave of public anger during economic downturns in order to restrict competition and access to capital. The authors also note that open borders help to keep economic and political elites in check and preserve competitive markets. These policy prescriptions should be heeded if the mistakes of the 1930s (or similar ones) are not to be repeated. This is also why the G20 process to achieve a level playing field with uniform rules of the game in the global financial and economic system, including as regards capital flow management, is so important. Once we accept that globalisation is not an irreversible or uniform process, the need to invest in better governance through co-operative outcomes at a global scale will follow. Policymakers at all levels should internalise this concept and act accordingly. Shock transmission and policy degrees of freedom in a globalised eraSecond, I would argue that globalisation (and in particular financial globalisation) has changed the risk and reward matrix associated with policy failures and successes, respectively. Globalisation may be initially more forgiving with policy mistakes on account of higher thresholds of tolerance, for example as regards current account or public debt positions. However - as the crisis has forcefully taught us - by enabling these imbalances to remain unaddressed for longer, the eventual cost of adjustment of unsustainable policies would be higher than would otherwise be the case – and the adjustment may occur in a very swift manner. It is the sudden operation of these centripetal (as opposed to centrifugal) forces of globalisation enabling the rapid propagation of shocks across borders which has led observers such as Rogoff to deem the euro area “the ultimate contagion machine” [32]. The key policy elements to restore normalcy in the euro area thus require (i) redressing the macroeconomic imbalances and unsustainable fiscal policies that lie at the heart of the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area; (ii) much greater economic policy co-ordination among monetary union members; and (iii) ensuring that there is an effective governance framework in place which can guard against similar instances from occurring in the future, inter alia through macroeconomic and fiscal surveillance and early correction mechanisms.Emerging challenges to monetary policy frameworksThird, as regards the challenges for monetary policy looking forward, central banks are likely to be subject to greater peer and public scrutiny in a world of higher interconnectedness. At the same time, however, monetary authorities are also more liable to be burdened with the spillovers resulting from the actions of other parties. Crucial challenges in this regard include the risk that monetary policy is overburdened by fiscally dominant regimes caused by government’s irresponsible fiscal behaviour and unsustainable public finances. There is also the risk that monetary policy is dominated by financial stability concerns, implying that price stability would be subjugated by financial stability. Monetary policy frameworks have to be made robust against the challenges ahead and I believe a number of principles for robust monetary policy frameworks should be strongly reaffirmed as a result. First, we should recognise the centrality of price stability for monetary policy. This is the best contribution that monetary authorities can make to overall economic welfare. Price stability should thus remain the primary task and the key ‘deliverable’ for central banks in the period ahead. The crisis has confirmed the importance of a clearly defined objective for price stability by contributing to anchor expectations during periods of turbulence when otherwise the private sector would become disoriented. There is also a ‘credibility premium’ to be obtained from an undisputable definition of price stability during such turbulent periods and we have to concentrate all our efforts in preserving the hard earned credibility over the last decades. Second, central bank independence under a clear mandate and transparent communication policies to anchor expectations will continue to be instrumental in the pursuit of price stability by monetary authorities.Third, globalisation implies a greater emphasis on the necessary medium-term orientation of monetary policies designed to maintain price stability. This is a concept which the ECB has espoused since its inception and we think that the limits of short-termism in policies have been fully exposed by the crisis.In conclusion, the crisis has been a sobering experience for policymakers, forcing them to rethink many priors in different realms. Insofar as monetary policy is concerned, we have learned that the perceived virtues which seemed to underpin its interactions with an increasingly globalised environment could in fact mask significant vices. Monetary policy making in the run up to the crisis was too complacent to macroeconomic stability, lacked sufficient medium-term orientation and under-appreciated the role of monetary and credit dynamics in monetary frameworks, also in view of identifying financial imbalances and globally interconnected risks.The relationship between monetary policy and globalisation will have to be redressed in the years to come. The process of globalisation should not be seen as irreversible and policymakers should actively invest in better governance at all levels. Monetary policymaking will remain challenging, not only due to the nature of the interactions in a global setting but also as a result of the burdens and demands that might be placed by other parties on central banks. Fiscal dominance and the subjugation of price stability to financial stability concerns appear as two distinctive risks in this regard.In this environment, the key task for central bankers in the years to come is the continuous strive to make our monetary policy frameworks more robust against the vices mentioned earlier. In this process, we need to reaffirm the principles which have been at the core of modern central banking and have served us well during the crisis, namely the centrality of price stability for monetary policy, and the importance of central bank independence and effective communication in the consecution of this goal. Lastly, monetary authorities should remind other parties that there are reasonable limits to what monetary policy can do so as to extricate the global economy from a predicament which needs to be solved at its roots.[1]I am grateful to a number of ECB colleagues who assisted in the preparation of this speech, including F. Ramon-Ballester for his excellent drafting support and W. Schill, P. Moutot, H-J Klöckers and T. Linzert for their valuable comments.[2]According to WTO data, the average growth of world merchandise export volumes per annum was 15% from 1960 to 1990 inclusive, as compared to average real GDP growth per annum of 8% over the same period.[3]According to UNCTAD data, the world stock of outward FDI increased from USD 564 billion in 1980 to USD 1763 billion in 1990.[4] See The End of History and the Last Man, book by F. Fukuyama (1992).[5] See The Borderless World (1990) and The End of the Nation-State (1995) , books by K. Ohmae[6]See for example Globalisation, History and Development: a tale of two Centuries, article by D. Nayyar (2006). The author notes that export shares in GDP for selected industrialised countries (e.g. UK, Germany, Japan) were broadly comparable in 2000 relative to 1913, and that the relative increase in export shares to GDP for these same countries between the periods 1900-1913 and 1973-2000 was also comparable. In addition, the stock of FDI as a proportion of world GDP was about 9% in the mid-1990s, similar to the ratio in 1913.[7] See for example Globalisation in Question, book by P. Hirst and G. Thompson (1999) and Globalization: A Short History, book by J. Osterhammel and P. Petersson (2005).[8]For a review of the arguments in this regard, see The Great Moderation, speech by B. Bernanke Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 2004 .[9] See Impact of Globalisation on Monetary Policy, article by K. Rogoff (2006).[10] See Globalisation and Inflation, Speech by C. Bean, Bank of England , October 2006[11] See The Impacts of Globalisation on Monetary Policy, article by J. Taylor (2008).[12]See Globalization and inflation: New Cross-Country Evidence on the Global Determinants of Domestic Inflation, article by C. Borio and A. Filardo, BIS, (2007).[13] See Globalization’s Effect on Interest Rates and the Yield Curve, article by T. Wu, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas (2006).[14] See Panel remarks at the Thirteenth International Conference “Financial Markets and the Real Economy in a Low Interest Rate Environment” by L. Reichlin (2006).[15] See The Equilibrium Level of the World Real Interest Rate, article by D. Giannone, M. Lenza and L. Reichlin (2007)[16] See for example The High-Frequency Response of Exchange Rates and Interest Rates to Macroeconomic Announcements, article by J. Faust, J. Rogers, S. Wang and J. Wright (2007).[17] See Testimony of Chairman Alan Greenspan Before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate , Federal Reserve Board's semi annual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress, February 2005[18]See Globalisation and Monetary Policy, speech by B. Bernanke, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 2007.[19] See The Effects of Globalisation on Inflation, Liquidity and Monetary Policy, speech by L. Papademos, ECB, June 2007.[20]See Economic Performance in the Greenspan Era: the Evolution of Events and Ideas, article by A. Blinder and R. Reis (2005).[21]See Enhancing Monetary Analysis, book edited by L. Papademos and J. Stark, ECB, 2010. [22] See Lessons for Monetary Policy Strategy from the Recent Past, article by S. Fahr, R. Motto, M, Rostagno, F. Smets and O. Tristani, ECB (2010).[23]See In Search of a Robust Monetary Policy Framework, speech by J. Stark, ECB, November 2010.[24] See This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, book by C. Reinhart and K. Rogoff (2009).[25] See Whither Monetary and Financial Stability? The Implications of Evolving Policy Regimes, article by C. Borio and W. White, BIS, 2004.[26] See The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future, speech by R. Rajan, IMF, August 2005.[27]K. Rogoff (2006), op. cit.[28]For example, the ECB’s Financial Stability Report consistently alerted on the vulnerabilities that were building up in the financial system, including through the significant underpricing of risks across a variety of asset classes, while official policy meetings (G7, G20, BIS-based) routinely warned on the possibility of a disorderly unwinding of global current account imbalances.[29] See Initial Lessons from the Crisis, IMF, February 2009.[30] See Monetary Policy Strategy in a Global Environment, article by P. Moutot and G. Vitale, ECB, 2009. In the EU, we have since attempted to correct for this ‘failure to connect the dots’ with the establishment of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) as the main body for macro-prudential oversight and surveillance of EU financial markets.[31]See Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists: Unleashing the Power of Financial Markets to Create Wealth and Spread Opportunity, book by R. Rajan and L. Zingales, (2003).[32]See the interview of K. Rogoff in the Frankfurter Allgemeiner Zeitung, September 2011Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen honour today read origin globalis monetari polici institut came learn establish order promot deeper understand global environ us monetari polici oper establish institut could time deepseat system natur current crisi certain provid numer interest question research explor year come good news therefor live challeng time work institut mean import polici relev work today futur bad news crisi still ongo insofar case ultim outcom remain uncertain inher peril provid analysi possibl polici prescript basi event either happen real time recent elaps seen mani dimens crisi sinc start august spread peripheri financi system core onto sovereign weaker balanc sheet turn contribut increas vulner core financi system even recent month negat selfreinforc dynam advers feedback loop weak sovereign financi sector balanc sheet appar part euro area everi step process entail transform risk one parti anoth policymak various domain regulatori financi fiscal monetari search workabl solut minimum evolv charact crisi forc polici maker work effect respons exig circumst remaind remark today would like shed light ongo polici respons point view monetari polici practition central bank draw relationship globalis monetari polici recent year consid extent variabl influenc either virtuous vicious manner use understand happen recent period also frame challeng might lie us result chang global environ monetari polici must oper go think two disclaim order first purport exhaust select discuss factor condit monetari polici framework global environ second intend taxat reflect assess monetari polici framework necessarili continu even aftermath crisi road virtu globalis monetari polici built two interrel premis first process globalis larg irrevers second byproduct process complement improv monetari policymak battl yesteryear decis won durabl manner new challeng appear manag relationship monetari polici globalis could thus best describ one symbiot natur mutual benefici review argument turn perceiv inevit globalis first assert irrevers globalis midst system crisi one current experienc may seem farfetch howev one look back enthusiasm prevail econom intern relat field earli appear inescap conclus growth world merchandis export volum alreadi consist outpac real gdp decad world stock outward fdi dramat increas period favour trend look set receiv boost account expect integr central eastern european economi well state former soviet union china mainstream world economi mani observ therefor agre fukuyama mark end histori intensifi scope depth econom financi exchang global economi follow seem confirm premis globalis concept remain elus defin even within narrow remit econom financ observ interpret develop slight differ manner one hand theorist ohma tend focus globalis product shift global financ underpin trend argu new capitalist system would progress emerg relev nation state econom actor dwindl import contrast observ saw grow internationalis world economi part broader longerd trend sharp intensif trade financi exchang underpin grow econom liber without histor preced exampl period rang observ thus bullish regard abil nation state retain econom power go forward consolid inter alia strateg allianc econom block spite nuanc common thread two view under econom forc seen inevit intern global domain complementar globalis econom perform policymakingsecond follow broad accept premis globalis world would durabl natur academ policymak devot attent flesh practic implic globalis differ polici environ insofar monetari polici concern debat broad captur relat weight improv policymak versus globalis factor account success econom outcom first dimens regard backward look natur stem sharp reduct variabl inflat output phenomenon becam known great moder coincid intensif globalis broadest possibl interpret name growth crossbord trade good servic financi asset complement improv inform technolog transfer well establish price stabilityori monetari polici framework independ central bank principl factor could help account improv macroeconom perform one hand globalis associ increas intern flow capit good servic result greater pressur toward price equalis converg well greater shock resili economi hand independ price stabil orient monetari policymak contribut overal greater macroeconom stabil lower output inflat volatil debat ensu among policymak academ assess relat merit contribut globalis monetari polici macroeconom stabil also suggest improv macroeconom perform accident natur reflect good luck tri settl debat today bound continu academ polici quarter although surpris central banker person believ monetari policymak deserv signific credit end least inflat ultim monetari phenomenon henc ultim determin monetari polici fundament point would like make seem larg degre posit complementari globalis outcom monetari policymak whether one thought polici framework larg manag keep inflat check alreadi low aid global factor altern consid low inflat respond polici framework success har forc globalis trend appear work virtuous direct second dimens debat involv monetari policymak globalis environ forwardlook natur relat perceiv abil monetari author continu deliv price stabil mandat main concern regard possibl effect globalis domest product labour market well financi condit extent incorpor central bank reaction function ensur effect monetari polici chang environ regard product labour market observ differ whether theoret vantagepoint globalis make short run phillip curv either steeper result greater price respons shift demand e g rogoff ii flatter result factor includ increas open reduc respons inflat domest output gap squeez profit margin due competit labour abund countri e g bean yet observ e g taylor argu correl globalis sort effect purport polici respons function spurious natur empir studi e g borio filardo show support flatten phillip curv measur global slack becom relat import account domest inflat relat domest one albeit case euro area integr low cost labour abund produc china global system led common percept emerg market export deflat view howev downplay costpush factor emerg market could relat price exampl rise demand commod work way shortrun fluctuat headlin inflat therefor clear widespread presumpt favour tailwind globalis inflat turn headwind pose challeng mainten price stabil addit policymak choos act dampen effect relat price chang absolut price level extent abl distinguish temporari shock perman inflat trend concern financi globalis main sourc concern policymak runup crisi stem potenti impact integr financi market monetari polici transmiss mechan exampl increas sensit investor lower interest rate differenti theoret point view observ argu key determin longterm interest rate global riskless real rate interest real risk premium inde influenc globalis environ circumst abil shortterm interest rate chang influenc longterm rate could problemat would otherwis case empir evid point end number advanc economi includ euro area well suggest global factor becom increas import determin nation real bond yield time also evid suggest respons longerterm yield unanticip chang shortterm rate remain unhind public remark policymak runup crisi show offici cognis increas challeng monetari polici brought financi globalis remark former feder reserv chairman greenspan note diverg evolut shortterm versus longterm rate us repres polici conundrum receiv ampl media attent regard speech march current feder reserv chairman bernank also acknowledg central bank analysi financi econom condit becom complex former ecb vicepresid papademo note similar challeng central bank monetari analysi anoth speech june howev public intervent also show policymak either side atlant remain confid abil monetari polici continu effect transmit monetari impuls financi market real economi notabl wellanchor inflat expect effect communic mediumterm orient monetari polici overal virtuous view relationship globalis monetari polici prevail runup crisi one potenti challeng polici framework pose integr product labour financi market appear manag view part condit favour experi great moder stabil orient monetari policymak globalis trend seem complement yield stabl macroeconom environ know virtuous view relationship globalis monetari polici came abrupt end septemb result lehman bankruptci event follow present day benefit hindsight becom evid policymak differ area economi thought thing control perfect storm simmer beneath surfac polici failur mani domain notabl supervisori regulatori regim well risk manag compens practic financi institut signific runup crisi crisi hit public balanc sheet burden respect cost support financi sector fiscal stimulus oper automat stabilis sharp econom downturn vulner emerg howev legitim ask relat respons monetari author contribut crisi whether activ inact would thus like highlight three element help sow seed vicious relationship regard complac insuffici mediumterm orient monetari policyth first complac inflat seem control follow great moder amid intensifi globalis mani observ thought monetari polici greater degre freedom devot shortterm demand manag propon view refer finetun whose theoret counterpart form flexibl inflat target ad emphasi output stabilis beyond inflat stabilis precrisi focus output gap mani way paradox insofar consensus macroeconom run full circl back intellectu climat policymak exagger real time measur econom slack root mani polici failur environ favour great inflat much emphasi short run econom develop view insuffici mediumterm orient monetari polici certain contribut part buildup monetari financi imbal although monetari polici framework orient toward mediumterm could probabl complet prevent current crisi convinc would help make less disrupt know ecb never subscrib view monetari polici primari role play manag aggreg demand think element precrisi monetari polici paradigm revis basi subsequ event underappreci monetari credit dynamicsa second element foster vicious relationship monetari polici globalis recent year underappreci monetari credit dynam part policymak hindsight crisi sober remind seed financi instabl often alik includ high leverag rapid growth financi institut balanc sheet mismatch trend pick close look monetari credit variabl even trend may address convent monetari polici tool requir macroprudenti action instead know liquid money lie core ecb second pillar monetari polici strategi emphasi seen mainstream model somewhat relic past howev crisi shown liquid various definit money critic element transmiss mechan use indic ecb prove use crisi exampl provid insight bank behaviour financ condit overal state busi cycl papademo stark evid suggest without take monetari analysi account inflat euro area would distinct higher time financi exuber would fallen deep negat territori wake financi market collaps thus think one reason revisit role monetari credit variabl monetari polici strategi go forward moreov disregard monetari financi phenomena policymak profound implic insofar found theoret underpin risk manag approach asset price trend consensus view runup crisi ecb subscrib best central bank could cleanup follow bubbl burst loosen monetari polici stanc subsequ event shown bubbl burst cost aggress ex post action may suffic expect central bank aggress protect market tail event bad time encourag market tendenc toward riski strategi overexposur exuber stark view asymmetri respond shock downsid risk economi receiv greater weight central banker polici prefer upsid risk price stabil contribut buildup financi imbal advanc economi main ex ant polici tool prevent situat develop first place sure found regulatori supervisori domain time author central bank howev without prejudic greater focus monetari phenomena central bank close scrutinis credit money develop inspir leaningagainstth wind stanc help smooth financi cycl stabilis economi medium term confus known known known unknown third element vice relationship monetari polici globalis recent year failur policymak think possibl way might call act result situat help bring wellcit book reinhart rogoff make compel case show financi bubbl throughout histori share number common element rise home price financi innov yet author point spite common trait policymak time fallen prey time differ ill moreov record show far back policymak academ alert emerg tail risk subsequ materialis name exampl borio white caution greater promin credit asset price boomandbust cycl even low inflat environ rajan care review worri trend associ globalis financi market rogoff note great moder associ lower asset price volatil record also show monetari author echo mani concern possibl disord unwind global imbal public discours includ speech offici public thus even novel correct say policymak unawar potenti risk associ globalis environ risk still materialis end part answer insuffici polici traction author compet heed warn howev also true onset crisi larg seen result vulner imbal grow steadili identifi fair earli process combin way would anticip especi case regard function financi system wider interconnect policymak thus confus risk thought knew known known risk knew didn know known unknown imf other deem failur connect dot insofar monetari author concern failur connect dot refer unanticip burden central bank result contribut creation global excess liquid latter role develop asset price boomandbust cycl burst bubbl chain event set motion result would ultim reverber back central bank activ imping price stabil outlook sever threat financi stabil case regardless whether monetari author formal respons safeguard financi stabil one reason monetari polici systemat incorpor financi analysi assess risk price stabil moutot vital addit threat price stabil sever strain govern fiscal solvenc also aros case would call unpreced central bank action limit polici mandat respons except exig circumst overal seed vice relationship monetari polici globalis recent year includ complac underappreci monetari credit dynam confus known known known unknown common thread potenti unintend consequ would therefor like outlin challeng may expect context period ahead natur relationship monetari polici globalis must redefin period ahead maintain virtu correct vice let give key polici element need success kind global system emerg aftermath crisi first take process globalis grant measur introduc respons crisi case revers aspect globalis contrari experi great depress seen rise trade protection recent year howev wit broadbas increas financi protection equal worri exampl bank system renationalis advanc economi includ euro area market segment reintroduc along nation line trend sustain futur euro area could particular affect financi integr key aspect smooth function monetari union broader viabil singl market anoth promin case rise financi protection recent year introduct measur curb capit inflow emerg economi part done effort contain fallout easi monetari polici key advanc economi landmark public rajan zingal offer power insight natur function financi market author warn establish might exploit wave public anger econom downturn order restrict competit access capit author also note open border help keep econom polit elit check preserv competit market polici prescript heed mistak similar one repeat also g process achiev level play field uniform rule game global financi econom system includ regard capit flow manag import accept globalis irrevers uniform process need invest better govern cooper outcom global scale follow policymak level internalis concept act accord shock transmiss polici degre freedom globalis erasecond would argu globalis particular financi globalis chang risk reward matrix associ polici failur success respect globalis may initi forgiv polici mistak account higher threshold toler exampl regard current account public debt posit howev crisi forc taught us enabl imbal remain unaddress longer eventu cost adjust unsustain polici would higher would otherwis case adjust may occur swift manner sudden oper centripet oppos centrifug forc globalis enabl rapid propag shock across border led observ rogoff deem euro area ultim contagion machin key polici element restor normalci euro area thus requir redress macroeconom imbal unsustain fiscal polici lie heart sovereign debt crisi euro area ii much greater econom polici coordin among monetari union member iii ensur effect govern framework place guard similar instanc occur futur inter alia macroeconom fiscal surveil earli correct mechan emerg challeng monetari polici frameworksthird regard challeng monetari polici look forward central bank like subject greater peer public scrutini world higher interconnected time howev monetari author also liabl burden spillov result action parti crucial challeng regard includ risk monetari polici overburden fiscal domin regim caus govern irrespons fiscal behaviour unsustain public financ also risk monetari polici domin financi stabil concern impli price stabil would subjug financi stabil monetari polici framework made robust challeng ahead believ number principl robust monetari polici framework strong reaffirm result first recognis central price stabil monetari polici best contribut monetari author make overal econom welfar price stabil thus remain primari task key deliver central bank period ahead crisi confirm import clear defin object price stabil contribut anchor expect period turbul otherwis privat sector would becom disori also credibl premium obtain undisput definit price stabil turbul period concentr effort preserv hard earn credibl last decad second central bank independ clear mandat transpar communic polici anchor expect continu instrument pursuit price stabil monetari author third globalis impli greater emphasi necessari mediumterm orient monetari polici design maintain price stabil concept ecb espous sinc incept think limit shortterm polici fulli expos crisi conclus crisi sober experi policymak forc rethink mani prior differ realm insofar monetari polici concern learn perceiv virtu seem underpin interact increas globalis environ could fact mask signific vice monetari polici make run crisi complac macroeconom stabil lack suffici mediumterm orient underappreci role monetari credit dynam monetari framework also view identifi financi imbal global interconnect risk relationship monetari polici globalis redress year come process globalis seen irrevers policymak activ invest better govern level monetari policymak remain challeng due natur interact global set also result burden demand might place parti central bank fiscal domin subjug price stabil financi stabil concern appear two distinct risk regard environ key task central banker year come continu strive make monetari polici framework robust vice mention earlier process need reaffirm principl core modern central bank serv us well crisi name central price stabil monetari polici import central bank independ effect communic consecut goal last monetari author remind parti reason limit monetari polici extric global economi predica need solv root grate number ecb colleagu assist prepar speech includ f ramonballest excel draft support w schill p moutot hj klöcker linzert valuabl comment accord wto data averag growth world merchandis export volum per annum inclus compar averag real gdp growth per annum period accord unctad data world stock outward fdi increas usd billion usd billion see end histori last man book f fukuyama see borderless world end nationst book k ohma see exampl globalis histori develop tale two centuri articl d nayyar author note export share gdp select industrialis countri e g uk germani japan broad compar relat relat increas export share gdp countri period also compar addit stock fdi proport world gdp mid similar ratio see exampl globalis question book p hirst g thompson global short histori book j osterhammel p petersson review argument regard see great moder speech b bernank board governor feder reserv system februari see impact globalis monetari polici articl k rogoff see globalis inflat speech c bean bank england octob see impact globalis monetari polici articl j taylor see global inflat new crosscountri evid global determin domest inflat articl c borio filardo bis see global effect interest rate yield curv articl wu feder reserv bank dalla see panel remark thirteenth intern confer financi market real economi low interest rate environ l reichlin see equilibrium level world real interest rate articl d giannon m lenza l reichlin see exampl highfrequ respons exchang rate interest rate macroeconom announc articl j faust j roger wang j wright see testimoni chairman alan greenspan committe bank hous urban affair u senat feder reserv board semi annual monetari polici report congress februari see globalis monetari polici speech b bernank board governor feder reserv system march see effect globalis inflat liquid monetari polici speech l papademo ecb june see econom perform greenspan era evolut event idea articl blinder r rei see enhanc monetari analysi book edit l papademo j stark ecb see lesson monetari polici strategi recent past articl fahr r motto m rostagno f smet o tristani ecb see search robust monetari polici framework speech j stark ecb novemb see time differ eight centuri financi folli book c reinhart k rogoff see whither monetari financi stabil implic evolv polici regim articl c borio w white bis see greenspan era lesson futur speech r rajan imf august k rogoff op cit exampl ecb financi stabil report consist alert vulner build financi system includ signific underpr risk across varieti asset class offici polici meet g g bisbas routin warn possibl disord unwind global current account imbal see initi lesson crisi imf februari see monetari polici strategi global environ articl p moutot g vital ecb eu sinc attempt correct failur connect dot establish european system risk board esrb main bodi macroprudenti oversight surveil eu financi market see save capit capitalist unleash power financi market creat wealth spread opportun book r rajan l zingal see interview k rogoff frankfurt allgemein zeitung septemb reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en