"Jean-Claude Trichet: Eulogy to Sławomir Skrzypek, President of Narodowy Bank Polski",19-04-2010,European Central Bank,ECB,451,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,It was on Saturday, one week ago, that we learned of the tragic plane crash near Smolensk. I was shocked and deeply saddened. My thoughts were with the family of Sławomir Skrzypek, whom we mourn today with the deepest grief.Sławomir served for over three years as the President of Narodowy Bank Polski. We worked closely together and met regularly in the General Council of the ECB. Sławomir was one of the youngest central bank governors in Europe. He brought to the General Council a thoughtful approach to our tasks and the vision and energy. His enthusiasm and commitment to Poland’s current and future role within the European Union will always be remembered.On behalf of the ECB’s Executive Board and all our staff, and on behalf of the ECB’s General Council, let me say once again how deeply we regret the loss of Sławomir. His family lost a beloved husband and father, and his colleagues have lost a good friend and an outstanding professional. Chateaubriand – the French poet – wrote: “In touching us, death does not defeat us; it only makes us invisible.”Sławomir will always remain in our memory. The life of the dead continues in the memory of the living.Our thoughts are today with the families of all the victims of the tragedy, and with the people of Poland. I have great respect and affection for Poland. I have closely followed the impressive steps forward that Poland has taken in its recent past. Its progress is of great significance also for Europe. This progress embodies the strength and resilience of the Polish people, who have always stood together in the face of adversity. I am confident that the dignity and solidarity consistently shown by the people of Poland in past times will prevail once again. There can be no rational explanation for such a tragedy, and under such circumstances it is better not to try to find one. It is impossible to glean any sense from an event which has taken so many lives and devastated so many others. Our only comfort can be that it will surely bring the Polish people and the people in Europe even closer together. Together with my colleague from the ECB’s Executive Board, José Manuel González-Páramo, we were planning to be with you today, to express our sincerest condolences once again to the family of Sławomir, to whom we bid farewell today. Our thoughts will continue to be with the people of Poland, who lost many outstanding public servants of the Polish nation. Among them – Sławomir Skrzypek.Rest in peace. Spoczywaj w pokoju, Sławku.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen saturday one week ago learn tragic plane crash near smolensk shock deepli sadden thought famili sławomir skrzypek mourn today deepest grief sławomir serv three year presid narodowi bank polski work close togeth met regular general council ecb sławomir one youngest central bank governor europ brought general council thought approach task vision energi enthusiasm commit poland current futur role within european union alway rememb behalf ecb execut board staff behalf ecb general council let say deepli regret loss sławomir famili lost belov husband father colleagu lost good friend outstand profession chateaubriand french poet wrote touch us death defeat us make us invis sławomir alway remain memori life dead continu memori live thought today famili victim tragedi peopl poland great respect affect poland close follow impress step forward poland taken recent past progress great signific also europ progress embodi strength resili polish peopl alway stood togeth face advers confid digniti solidar consist shown peopl poland past time prevail ration explan tragedi circumst better tri find one imposs glean sens event taken mani live devast mani other comfort sure bring polish peopl peopl europ even closer togeth togeth colleagu ecb execut board josé manuel gonzálezpáramo plan today express sincerest condol famili sławomir bid farewel today thought continu peopl poland lost mani outstand public servant polish nation among sławomir skrzypek rest peac spoczywaj w pokoju sławku reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en