Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Looking beyond the euro's first decade,18-02-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,3575,"<p>It is a great pleasure to be here today. The publication of David Marsh’s new book, shortly after the euro’s tenth anniversary, is a good opportunity to review the status of the currency and its prospects in the coming decade. It’s a real “Marsh book” – a pleasure to read, even though some quotes and statements might sometimes be controversial. In any case, David Marsh seems to have taken to heart the main lesson of the current financial crisis: avoid excessive risk. Indeed, he is walking along a kind of tightrope, often quoting people or presenting views in such a way that they contradict or contrast with each other. That way, he is likely to come out on the right side of things, whatever happens. Let me give an example, by quoting the very last paragraph of the book, which looks forward to the next ten years: “The lesson of the first decade is there is no certainty that the single currency will survive the next one unscathed. Yet if the Euro overcomes its trials and becomes a durable success, that accomplishment, measured by all that has gone before, will truly be the richest of triumphs.”In other words, either it’s a real success, or…it’s a real disaster. Good hedging, indeed!I will not review all the themes addressed in the book, but would like to touch on a few key issues that can help us get a better understanding of what has happened over the last ten years and how the euro is likely to develop over the next ten. David Marsh is cautious when assessing the euro’s first ten years. In his introduction, he even sounds Solomonic, suggesting that: “It’s too early to say”. There is nothing wrong with such skepticism, and it’s always better to be prudent. Such prudence nevertheless reminds me of the answer that Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai gave in the mid 1970’s to a question about the impact of the French revolution of 1789. He too remarked: “It’s too early to say”.Today, I would like to start by presenting some facts about the last ten years. Then I’ll consider the main hidden message of the book, which is that monetary union is a political union. Finally, I will try to give my own perspective on the next ten years. Any assessment of the first ten years of the euro should consider what the objectives were at the start of Monetary Union. In particular, we should avoid attributing to the euro merits or demerits it should not have or never aspired to. Let me consider some of the objectives of the euro and the expectations it gave rise to.The first, main objective of the euro was to create an area of monetary stability in Europe. This has been achieved. The average inflation rate between 1999 and 2008 was 2.2%, about 1 percentage point less than in the 1990s. It is also lower than the best performing countries, like Germany, before the euro. Monetary stability has been reflected also in the low level of interest rates, which is also an improvement compared with the previous decade. This suggests that monetary stability is now well entrenched in expectations. A second objective was to ensure that this monetary stability was not attained at the expense of economic growth and stability. This too has been achieved. The GDP growth rate of the euro area over the last decade has been similar, by and large, to that of the previous decade, both in absolute and in per capita terms. Unemployment has been lower on average and employment growth stronger. All this has been achieved in spite of the more rigorous budgetary policies of the Member States, at least compared with the previous decade. This suggests that the Stability and Growth Pact has not imposed a straightjacket on our economies.You could argue that other countries, in particular EU countries which do not have the euro, have performed even better than the euro area. The UK has had a higher average inflation rate than the euro area but also a higher growth rate; Sweden has a comparable inflation rate and higher growth. But then you have to compare like with like. In the euro area there are countries of a comparable size to the UK, like Spain, which have had even stronger growth during these years. Others though have grown less. The euro area and the US are often compared, and these two monetary areas are of a size that can be compared. This type of comparison is often based on false impressions. Even David Marsh might have fallen into this trap, when he comments that “ Measured against the world’s largest economy, the US, Europe’s performance as a whole has stalled since the heyday of post-war reconstruction.” Looking carefully at the data, over the last decade the US has recorded higher average GDP growth than the euro area only because of its higher population growth. GDP per capita has increased at exactly the same pace in the two areas. You might have expected growth to have been stronger in the euro area, as the starting point was lower. But comparing levels is not so easy, and depends very much on the exchange rate used as well as other variables.As for employment growth over the last ten years, it has been stronger in the euro area than in the US, and the rate of unemployment has decreased to a substantially greater extent. Of course, the last few months of this decade have been different. I will come back to this issue later. Making assessments on the basis of long averages means that adjustments are made to take account of cyclical and temporary shocks. However, this might lead us astray. It would be incorrect to claim that the strong employment results achieved over the last ten years are exclusively due to the euro. The improvement is more likely to stem from the structural reforms implemented in the Member States over the years.A third objective of the euro was to move forward the integration of the financial markets. The results in this field are positive, but also uneven, depending on the market segment. Integration is more advanced in the areas close to the single monetary policy, but it also depends on the degree of integration of the underlying market infrastructure. The euro area money market, the segment closest to the single monetary policy, reached a stage of “near perfect” integration almost immediately after the introduction of the euro. The malfunctioning of recent months is common to all currencies. On the other hand, short-term debt securities (i.e. commercial paper and certificates of deposit) have remained much more fragmented. Financial integration has been fastest in the government bond market, where yields have converged and are increasingly driven by common factors, although local factors and perceived differences in credit risk continue to play a role. Likewise, the corporate bond segment is also more integrated as the various markets have merged into a single, yet diversified euro market. As a result, country-specific factors have become less important in determining corporate bond prices and spreads. Cross-border holdings of long-term debt securities of monetary financial institutions grew from about 15% in 1999 to nearly 40% in 2007. Integration in the equity markets is less advanced but shows signs of improvement. Between 1997 and 2006, euro area investors doubled their holdings of equity issued in other euro area countries to 29% of their total portfolio of euro area equity assets. The retail banking segment has remained more fragmented. In particular, the euro area cross-country dispersion of bank interest rates, especially of interest rates on consumer loans, has remained relatively high. This reflects different conditions in national economies (e.g. credit and interest rate risk, size of firms, industrial structure and degree of capital market development), institutional factors (e.g. taxation, regulation, supervision and consumer protection) and financial structures (e.g. degree of bank/capital market financing and competitiveness). It was probably overoptimistic to expect a faster convergence in this segment.The creation of the euro also gave rise to expectations of a broad based convergence of underlying economic developments. These expectations were quite varied, in fact. Some people expected greater divergence as a consequence of specialisation. Others expected greater convergence. The result is mixed. Some convergence has been observed, in particular in terms of business cycle and dispersion across countries, which is comparable with that among the US states. The degree of business cycle synchronisation has remained at the same levels reached in the second half of the 1990s. [1] On the other hand, some underlying variables have diverged, in particular cost and price competitiveness, leading to an accumulation of payments imbalances within the euro area. Some countries have accumulated large current account deficits, while others have growing surpluses. You could argue that imbalances do not matter in a monetary union, because they are automatically financed. But such imbalances might make countries more vulnerable to external shocks and their financing might become more difficult in the midst of a financial crisis, even within a monetary union. One of the disappointing aspects of the last ten years has been the Lisbon process and the slow pace of structural reform. What does this have to do with the euro? The Lisbon process is an EU initiative. It is voluntary, it imposes no constraints, and rightly so, since it involves policies which follow the principle of subsidiarity and remain in the hands of the Member States. Would the Lisbon process have been more effective without the euro? I seriously doubt it.Overall, I believe that the euro has largely fulfilled the expectations. Maybe with one exception: the cash changeover from national currencies to the euro in 2002, and the way it was perceived by the public. I will not dwell too much on this. Certainly the euro has performed a role that nobody expected at the start, being the scapegoat for a whole series of negative developments, at national and European level. For several years, whenever problems occurred, ordinary people and even politicians found Europe and the euro a handy target. One of the very few benefits of the financial crisis is the growing awareness that, without the euro, people in the euro area would have been affected much more. An important – maybe unintentional – message of David Marsh’s book is that Monetary Union is in fact a political union. This is reflected in his detailed historical account of events that led to Monetary Union. It’s all about political leaders discussing, negotiating, agreeing or disagreeing, taking decisions, committing their own countries. Even the non-decisions, or the decisions not to participate, were political decisions. Interestingly, the historical chapters omit two important episodes, which have also had political consequences, even in a country like the UK, which is outside the euro area. The first is the Messina Conference in 1955, which laid the foundations for the European Union. The conference is remembered, among other things, for the statement made by the UK diplomat who left the proceedings stating: “The future treaty you are discussing has no chance of being agreed; if it was agreed, it would have no chance of being ratified; and if it was ratified, it would have no chance of being applied.” This remark seems to encapsulate Britain’s political ambivalence towards Europe and has permeated the country’s attitude to the EU ever since.The second episode is more recent and more personal: I was a young sherpa in the Italian delegation to the European Council in Rome on 27-28 October 1990 which called for intergovernmental conferences on Political Union and on Economic and Monetary Union. The Council decided on the start of the second phase of EMU, 1 January 1994, and the creation of an institution in charge of developing “the instruments and procedures needed for the future conduct of monetary policy”. It was also decisive for one of the Heads of Government who, by insisting on having a dissenting voice, inserted in a footnote to the commonly agreed Conclusions, was unable to convince back home that such a footnote was in the country’s best interest. Lady Thatcher had in fact fully understood what the founding fathers had known for years, i.e. that monetary union was a political endeavour, and that the final goal was political union, albeit a different union from those we are used to studying in textbooks. Creating the euro, adopting it or not adopting it, are not mere technical decisions but key political choices, and have profound political implications, which are quite different from being a member of the European Union. This might not have been fully realised by all. Let me give an example. No opt-out clause was offered to the Member States which joined in 2004, even though some of them might have been less enthusiastic about joining the euro area than joining the EU itself. A formalistic reading of the Treaty reveals that all countries except the UK and Denmark are committed to converging as soon as possible to the single currency, even in those countries where popular support for it seems to be still limited. A strict interpretation of the Treaty indicates that Sweden should not have had a referendum on the euro in 2003. Indeed, by ratifying the Maastricht Treaty, Sweden committed itself to joining the euro as soon as possible. In practice, nobody complains that the letter of the Treaty is being ignored, because a country cannot be forced into the euro if it is politically unready to join. Being part of a monetary union binds its members at different political levels, not all of which are easily visible. Take fiscal policy. The provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact are more stringent for the euro area than the EU. This is not only a formalistic aspect. It is also substantive. Discussions within the Eurogroup are of a substantive nature, although from the outside it doesn’t always seem so. One example of a discussion which did become public was the decision taken by the Eurogroup, by a qualified majority, on the evening of 24 November 2003 – or should I say in the early hours of 25 November – to vote against the Commission recommendation to open an excessive deficit procedure against France and Germany. Whether right or wrong, that decision was undeniably a political one, and had deep implications for the budgetary policies of the two countries and for the relationship between European institutions. It was taken with the full involvement of the competent political bodies, at national and European level. This is not always fully understood, in particular across the Channel, where it is often thought – and reported – that joining the euro would put national fiscal policies under the control of bureaucrats in Brussels or Frankfurt.Political integration in the euro area is an evolutionary process. The special meeting of the Eurogroup, in the composition of Heads of State and Government, in Paris on 12 October last year was a first: it addressed the financial crisis, and in doing so the euro area showed its effectiveness and its capacity for leadership. It is an important precedent, which shows that when needed the euro area can take important decisions and cooperate swiftly. The Eurogroup probably won't need to meet regularly in this format – as this would risk overshadowing the finance ministers’ meetings – but now at least it is an option, a feasible one. Let me give you another example of ongoing political integration. The current crisis has shown the need to strengthen prudential supervision and, in particular, its links with central banking. This is a recommendation contained in various documents and reports, in particular that of the Financial Stability Forum’s to the G7 Ministers and central bank governors. Several countries will be moving in this direction. In the US the Federal Reserve will receive greater responsibilities for macro-prudential supervision. The euro area has a centralised decision-making process for monetary policy but a de-centralised system of supervision. The conclusion is obvious: cooperation between supervisors needs to be much stronger within the euro area. This also implies that the ECB, which conducts the monetary policy for the euro area, should be entrusted with greater supervisory powers, in particular concerning macro-prudential supervision. There should be a broad consensus on such a proposal among euro area members. However, this can be implemented only by activating article 105.6 of the EU Treaty, which requires unanimity of the EU member states. Will some non-euro area members oppose this? A final word on political union. A superficial reading of David Marsh’s book might give the impression that political integration has taken place over the years as a result of some countries dominating others, distrust between political classes of different countries, threats, truces and fights, etc. It’s interesting to relate history in this way. But we should never forget that the creation of the euro has been the result of an unprecedented democratic and peaceful process in Europe, led over 50 years by leaders who have put the interests of the people of Europe ahead of any other objective. Where does this leave us in the next ten years? As the euro enters its second decade, conditions aren’t exactly auspicious, as we are facing the most serious economic crisis since World War II. I’m sure the challenges ahead for the euro will be considerable. The global recession is a challenge not only for the euro area but for all countries. It has had and will have serious repercussions on our economies and on the fabric of our societies. They will be exposed to severe stresses and strains. The specialisation model of the past two decades might no longer be viable. I have the impression that some policy-makers think that their national economies will return to the state of balance which existed before the crisis. They don’t seem to realise that that was actually a state of imbalance, characterised by excessive borrowing by the private sector and excessive leverage by the financial institutions. This misperception might lead to inappropriate policy decisions.Unlike in previous crises, one difference on this occasion and in the years ahead is that the euro area countries will not be able to use the exchange rate as a policy instrument. This fact seems to excite many commentators. Some believe it will create further tensions within the euro area, and may lead to a split-up. Other observers, on the opposite, foresee a strengthening of other policy instruments to face up to the challenges. I won’t respond to such speculation, but will make a few points for you to consider.First, one reason for creating the euro was to avoid precisely the kind of turbulence that occurred in Europe when we had a large number of currencies with adjustable exchange rates. There is no doubt that the effects of the crisis would have been greater if the euro area members still had their own currencies. This is the lesson from the upheaval of 1992-93, which is fully understood today. To use Chancellor Merkel’s words: “ One of the lessons of this financial crisis is that, if we hadn’t had the euro, we would have had to invent it”.Second, the current crisis is bound to raise again the issue of whether a single market like the one we have among 27 countries in the EU can function smoothly when the exchange rate of some of the members is allowed – or even encouraged - to depreciate sharply, possibly distorting competition. The integrity of the single market itself can be put at risk if the exchange rate is used – and seen to be used - as an instrument to gain competitiveness at the detriment of the others. This may fuel reaction and fuel protectionist pressures, also within the EU. Little attention has been paid so far to the risks incurred by the single market in current times, as compared to the speculations about the single currency. Third, some countries in the euro area have experienced a divergence in terms of growth, price dynamics and public finances. The divergence was partly a consequence of the strong economic growth over the last few years. However, this convergence might have been based, in part, on unsound fundamentals, so some correction was inevitable. Correction will be needed particularly in areas related to labour market functioning, public expenditures and financial markets. Some observers have said that these corrections could be made more easily if the countries in question were outside the euro area and could devalue their currencies. This conjecture is not only questionable from a theoretical viewpoint, it is irrelevant from a practical perspective. The next ten years will be quite demanding for the euro, possibly more so than the first ten. Adolescence is generally a more tempestuous time than infancy. There is a saying in Italian: “Bambini piccoli, problemi piccoli…”. It means “ small children, small problems…” implying that as children grow older the problems tend to increase. The founding fathers of the euro knew this. Yet, we know from psychology that the first seven years of a person’s life are the most important ones and critically influence how he or she will behave as an adult. Judging from the first years of the euro, we can be confident that our currency will be up to the challenge.  Thank you for your attention.[1] See the European Commission’s EMU@10 report.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",great pleasur today public marsh new book short euro tenth anniversari good opportun review status currenc prospect come decad real marsh book pleasur read even though quot statement might sometim controversi case marsh seem taken heart main lesson current financi crisi avoid excess risk inde walk along kind tightrop often quot peopl present view way contradict contrast way like come right side thing whatev happen let give exampl quot last paragraph book look forward next ten year lesson first decad certainti singl currenc surviv next one unscath yet euro overcom trial becom durabl success accomplish measur gone truli richest triumph word either real success real disast good hedg inde review theme address book would like touch key issu help us get better understand happen last ten year euro like develop next ten marsh cautious assess euro first ten year introduct even sound solomon suggest earli say noth wrong skeptic alway better prudent prudenc nevertheless remind answer chines premier zhou enlai gave mid question impact french revolut remark earli say today would like start present fact last ten year ll consid main hidden messag book monetari union polit union final tri give perspect next ten year assess first ten year euro consid object start monetari union particular avoid attribut euro merit demerit never aspir let consid object euro expect gave rise first main object euro creat area monetari stabil europ achiev averag inflat rate percentag point less also lower best perform countri like germani euro monetari stabil reflect also low level interest rate also improv compar previous decad suggest monetari stabil well entrench expect second object ensur monetari stabil attain expens econom growth stabil achiev gdp growth rate euro area last decad similar larg previous decad absolut per capita term unemploy lower averag employ growth stronger achiev spite rigor budgetari polici member state least compar previous decad suggest stabil growth pact impos straightjacket economi could argu countri particular eu countri euro perform even better euro area uk higher averag inflat rate euro area also higher growth rate sweden compar inflat rate higher growth compar like like euro area countri compar size uk like spain even stronger growth year other though grown less euro area us often compar two monetari area size compar type comparison often base fals impress even marsh might fallen trap comment measur world largest economi us europ perform whole stall sinc heyday postwar reconstruct look care data last decad us record higher averag gdp growth euro area higher popul growth gdp per capita increas exact pace two area might expect growth stronger euro area start point lower compar level easi depend much exchang rate use well variabl employ growth last ten year stronger euro area us rate unemploy decreas substanti greater extent cours last month decad differ come back issu later make assess basi long averag mean adjust made take account cyclic temporari shock howev might lead us astray would incorrect claim strong employ result achiev last ten year exclus due euro improv like stem structur reform implement member state year third object euro move forward integr financi market result field posit also uneven depend market segment integr advanc area close singl monetari polici also depend degre integr under market infrastructur euro area money market segment closest singl monetari polici reach stage near perfect integr almost immedi introduct euro malfunct recent month common currenc hand shortterm debt secur e commerci paper certif deposit remain much fragment financi integr fastest govern bond market yield converg increas driven common factor although local factor perceiv differ credit risk continu play role likewis corpor bond segment also integr various market merg singl yet diversifi euro market result countryspecif factor becom less import determin corpor bond price spread crossbord hold longterm debt secur monetari financi institut grew near integr equiti market less advanc show sign improv euro area investor doubl hold equiti issu euro area countri total portfolio euro area equiti asset retail bank segment remain fragment particular euro area crosscountri dispers bank interest rate especi interest rate consum loan remain relat high reflect differ condit nation economi e g credit interest rate risk size firm industri structur degre capit market develop institut factor e g taxat regul supervis consum protect financi structur e g degre bankcapit market financ competit probabl overoptimist expect faster converg segment creation euro also gave rise expect broad base converg under econom develop expect quit vari fact peopl expect greater diverg consequ specialis other expect greater converg result mix converg observ particular term busi cycl dispers across countri compar among us state degre busi cycl synchronis remain level reach second half hand under variabl diverg particular cost price competit lead accumul payment imbal within euro area countri accumul larg current account deficit other grow surplus could argu imbal matter monetari union automat financ imbal might make countri vulner extern shock financ might becom difficult midst financi crisi even within monetari union one disappoint aspect last ten year lisbon process slow pace structur reform euro lisbon process eu initi voluntari impos constraint right sinc involv polici follow principl subsidiar remain hand member state would lisbon process effect without euro serious doubt overal believ euro larg fulfil expect mayb one except cash changeov nation currenc euro way perceiv public dwell much certain euro perform role nobodi expect start scapegoat whole seri negat develop nation european level sever year whenev problem occur ordinari peopl even politician found europ euro handi target one benefit financi crisi grow awar without euro peopl euro area would affect much import mayb unintent messag marsh book monetari union fact polit union reflect detail histor account event led monetari union polit leader discuss negoti agre disagre take decis commit countri even nondecis decis particip polit decis interest histor chapter omit two import episod also polit consequ even countri like uk outsid euro area first messina confer laid foundat european union confer rememb among thing statement made uk diplomat left proceed state futur treati discuss chanc agre agre would chanc ratifi ratifi would chanc appli remark seem encapsul britain polit ambival toward europ permeat countri attitud eu ever sinc second episod recent person young sherpa italian deleg european council rome octob call intergovernment confer polit union econom monetari union council decid start second phase emu januari creation institut charg develop instrument procedur need futur conduct monetari polici also decis one head govern insist dissent voic insert footnot common agre conclus unabl convinc back home footnot countri best interest ladi thatcher fact fulli understood found father known year e monetari union polit endeavour final goal polit union albeit differ union use studi textbook creat euro adopt adopt mere technic decis key polit choic profound polit implic quit differ member european union might fulli realis let give exampl optout claus offer member state join even though might less enthusiast join euro area join eu formalist read treati reveal countri except uk denmark commit converg soon possibl singl currenc even countri popular support seem still limit strict interpret treati indic sweden referendum euro inde ratifi maastricht treati sweden commit join euro soon possibl practic nobodi complain letter treati ignor countri cannot forc euro polit unreadi join part monetari union bind member differ polit level easili visibl take fiscal polici provis stabil growth pact stringent euro area eu formalist aspect also substant discuss within eurogroup substant natur although outsid doesn alway seem one exampl discuss becom public decis taken eurogroup qualifi major even novemb say earli hour novemb vote commiss recommend open excess deficit procedur franc germani whether right wrong decis undeni polit one deep implic budgetari polici two countri relationship european institut taken full involv compet polit bodi nation european level alway fulli understood particular across channel often thought report join euro would put nation fiscal polici control bureaucrat brussel frankfurt polit integr euro area evolutionari process special meet eurogroup composit head state govern pari octob last year first address financi crisi euro area show effect capac leadership import preced show need euro area take import decis cooper swift eurogroup probabl won need meet regular format would risk overshadow financ minist meet least option feasibl one let give anoth exampl ongo polit integr current crisi shown need strengthen prudenti supervis particular link central bank recommend contain various document report particular financi stabil forum g minist central bank governor sever countri move direct us feder reserv receiv greater respons macroprudenti supervis euro area centralis decisionmak process monetari polici decentralis system supervis conclus obvious cooper supervisor need much stronger within euro area also impli ecb conduct monetari polici euro area entrust greater supervisori power particular concern macroprudenti supervis broad consensus propos among euro area member howev implement activ articl eu treati requir unanim eu member state noneuro area member oppos final word polit union superfici read marsh book might give impress polit integr taken place year result countri domin other distrust polit class differ countri threat truce fight etc interest relat histori way never forget creation euro result unpreced democrat peac process europ led year leader put interest peopl europ ahead object leav us next ten year euro enter second decad condit aren exact auspici face serious econom crisi sinc world war ii m sure challeng ahead euro consider global recess challeng euro area countri serious repercuss economi fabric societi expos sever stress strain specialis model past two decad might longer viabl impress policymak think nation economi return state balanc exist crisi seem realis actual state imbal characteris excess borrow privat sector excess leverag financi institut mispercept might lead inappropri polici decis unlik previous crise one differ occas year ahead euro area countri abl use exchang rate polici instrument fact seem excit mani comment believ creat tension within euro area may lead splitup observ opposit forese strengthen polici instrument face challeng won respond specul make point consid first one reason creat euro avoid precis kind turbul occur europ larg number currenc adjust exchang rate doubt effect crisi would greater euro area member still currenc lesson upheav fulli understood today use chancellor merkel word one lesson financi crisi hadn euro would invent second current crisi bound rais issu whether singl market like one among countri eu function smooth exchang rate member allow even encourag depreci sharpli possibl distort competit integr singl market put risk exchang rate use seen use instrument gain competit detriment other may fuel reaction fuel protectionist pressur also within eu littl attent paid far risk incur singl market current time compar specul singl currenc third countri euro area experienc diverg term growth price dynam public financ diverg part consequ strong econom growth last year howev converg might base part unsound fundament correct inevit correct need particular area relat labour market function public expenditur financi market observ said correct could made easili countri question outsid euro area could devalu currenc conjectur question theoret viewpoint irrelev practic perspect next ten year quit demand euro possibl first ten adolesc general tempestu time infanc say italian bambini piccoli problemi piccoli mean small children small problem impli children grow older problem tend increas found father euro knew yet know psycholog first seven year person life import one critic influenc behav adult judg first year euro confid currenc challeng thank attent see european commiss emu report reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en