Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: What has the financial crisis taught us? The global dimension and international policy cooperation,07-09-2010,European Central Bank,ECB,4456,"<p>A striking feature of the crisis is the synchronised manner in which shocks have been transmitted across market segments and countries. And a key lesson of the crisis is that keeping an economy in order does not necessarily insulate it from external shocks. An excessive focus on the domestic economy may exacerbate global economic and financial imbalances, ultimately making future global crises more likely and more severe. The key challenge faced by global policy-makers is to make the system safer and avert future crises. A new paradigm for international cooperation is thus required from global policy-makers – one in which longer-term objectives, such as sustainable growth, are fully internalised. The speech also highlights the importance of peer-reviewed mechanisms and strong surveillance in this context.It is a great pleasure to share with you some thoughts about the financial crisis, which will be the focus of my talk today. If I had to pick a striking feature of the crisis from which we can draw lessons for the future, I would choose the term ‘contagion’. It’s contagion that has made this crisis truly global. The synchronised manner in which shocks have been transmitted across market segments and countries is perhaps what distinguishes this crisis from previous ones. The growing interconnectedness of the world economy has enabled the crisis to spread above and beyond what would be warranted by fundamentals and to attain a truly global dimension.To me, a key message for all of us from the crisis is that keeping an economy in order, keeping one’s own house in order, so to speak, does not necessarily insulate it from external shocks. Moreover, an excessive focus on the domestic economy may actually exacerbate global economic and financial imbalances, ultimately making future global crises more likely and more severe. The key challenge faced by global policy-makers is to make the system safer and avert future crises. No country is immune to them.Strengthening international cooperation in the global economic and financial sphere is crucial. Policy-makers have been paying lip-service to international cooperation for years. It is a policy prescription that is commonly stated but – let’s admit it – rarely defined, and therein lies the problem. To some, the upper bound of international cooperation is determined by the advice to put your house in order. Understood in this way, international cooperation is an exercise in which the national authorities are solely responsible for identifying and solving problems, albeit in a process which is monitored by other parties. Advocates of such a form of cooperation – if we can call it that – tend to cite its advantages: they claim, for instance, that national authorities ‘know best’ or that full sovereignty and the absence of finger-pointing increases the chances of achieving cooperative outcomes.Moreover, the ‘put your house in order’ approach to international cooperation neatly provides both the recipe for corrective action as well as the blueprint for the sustainability of the system: if each party managed to keep its own house in order – the theory goes – policy failures would not occur, negative spillovers would be contained, and crises would not happen. In this talk today, I would like to explain why a system of international cooperation built on the ‘put your house in order’ concept is insufficient to achieve global economic and financial stability. I will outline the global roots of the crisis, and in particular how a lack of coordination of international policies was inspired precisely by the ‘put your house in order’ approach to international cooperation. Insufficient cooperation was evident in a number of areas. There were, for instance, supervisory and regulatory inconsistencies involving systemic players as well as a lacklustre policy response to global imbalances. I will also review how the gaps in the system in turn helped the crisis to spread globally across segments and countries.All of this suggests that maintaining the pre-crisis mode of cooperation – i.e. the one which did not anticipate and keep at bay the trouble we got into – cannot be a sustainable recipe for the recovery. I will argue that a new paradigm for international cooperation is required from global policy-makers − one in which longer-term objectives, such as sustainable growth, are fully internalised in a time-consistent manner. I will conclude by pointing to the importance of peer-reviewed mechanisms and strong surveillance in this context, and also draw on the European experience to this end. In its most basic form, the crisis demonstrated the lack of cooperation at various levels: Before the crisis, the system displayed an interesting dichotomy, with finance being increasingly global while supervision and regulation largely remaining national in scope and only loosely coordinated internationally. The fact that rules and regulations differed for systemic players in areas such as bank capital and liquidity requirements or accounting standards was not thought to be a problem as long as the applicable ‘rulebook’ was clear in each jurisdiction. This was consistent with the ‘put your house in order’ premise for international cooperation. Few observers at the time paid attention to the apparent contradictions inherent in the system, but in hindsight the shortcomings resulting from this arrangement are all too evident. Diverging rules and regulations encouraged regulatory arbitrage by financial institutions. More broadly, the system was not equipped to cope with the international nature of the crisis. For example, the absence of a clear cross-border banking resolution framework in Europe conditioned the authorities’ initial response to the crisis in this field, which was initially hesitant and ‘national’ in character. The absence of a common rulebook for global financial systems exacerbated other weaknesses in the ‘put your house in order’ category, including poor risk management by institutions and a generalised underestimation of risk, leading to an overextended financial sector.Excessive global imbalances [2] had a major role in creating the fragilities that led to the crisis. Policies inspired by the ‘put your house in order’ philosophy were the main determinants of global imbalances because they lacked medium-term orientation and global coordination. In other words, these policies were excessively short-term and did not fully account for the knock-on effects (or negative externalities) on each other. The years prior to 2007 were characterised by low financial market volatility and risk premia across market segments and low yields across the maturity spectrum. In this environment, banks and other investors engaged in a ‘search for yield’ spurring financial innovation. The pace of financial innovation exceeded the supervisors’ and market participants’ capacity to solve a number of valuation, risk management and incentive issues. The result was a highly opaque system of credit risk distribution.The low-yield environment therefore played a key role in the accumulation of fragilities that led to the crisis. Its core macroeconomic precondition was a global glut in net savings as well as liquidity, coupled with a lack of safe financial assets at global level. The savings and liquidity glut was largely the outcome of policies that reinforced or insufficiently countered the effects of savings-investments and current account configurations. Part of the responsibility for the creation of global imbalances lay with those countries that underestimated the risks of high consumer indebtedness and large current account deficits. However, export-led growth strategies pursued by several systemically important emerging market economies, including China, also contributed substantially to the build-up of fragilities at global level. These strategies, intentionally or not, led to persistent interventions in the foreign exchange market on a unilateral basis and the accumulation of large external reserves reinvested in the borrowing countries. In the short term, the strategies generated growth in these economies; however they had several negative effects, both at domestic and at global level. Domestically, they led to forms of financial underdevelopment that had negative consequences on capital allocation and income distribution. At global level, export-led growth strategies made it easy for the US to incur large and increasing current account deficits and to delay the necessary adjustments. They also gave rise to an accumulation of dollar-denominated assets which could not be reinvested in emerging market economies due to their financial underdevelopment in the form of a shortage of safe financial assets. Moreover, the build-up of these assets resulted in a de facto taxation of consumption and a subsidy for inefficient investment, which in turn prevented an efficient inter-temporal smoothing of consumption and a rebalancing of growth towards domestic demand.All of these factors contributed to the compression of yields across the maturity spectrum. According to the average estimates of a pool of studies, central bank purchases of US Treasuries alone lowered US long-term interest rates by around 70 basis points, with some studies estimating an impact of up to 200 basis points.Surveillance mechanisms with ‘put your house in order’ at their heart proved to be weak in the run-up to the crisis. The IMF recognised that a surveillance framework centred around ‘put your house in order’ was insufficient to meet the demands of the world economy in 2007, when it updated its Decision on Bilateral Surveillance over Members’ Policies and placed the concept of external stability (the country-level counterpart to international stability) at its heart. The Decision also reaffirmed that Fund surveillance should focus on promoting countries’ external stability and examining whether a country’s exchange rate, fiscal, monetary and financial sector policies are consistent with this objective. Unfortunately, the IMF’s 2007 Surveillance Decision was never implemented as originally devised, largely because of some countries’ resistance to having their exchange rates labelled as ‘fundamentally misaligned’. The revised surveillance guidelines have shied away from this label in an effort to reduce stigma and thereby increase the traction of Fund surveillance with policy-makers. I will come back to this and other Fund efforts to modernise surveillance at the end of my talk. Weaknesses in surveillance before the crisis were not only apparent in multilateral institutions but also in regional peer-reviewed mechanisms, such as the ones underpinning the economic governance of the euro area. The problems associated with the implementation of the EU’s Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) and the statistical deficiencies which undermined confidence in Greece have been the salient examples in this regard. I will also come back at a later stage to the policy efforts undertaken by European authorities to deal with these shortcomings.Not all the pre-crisis surveillance failings can be attributed to the inadequate identification of risks. Even when the policy prescription was correct, implementation was lagging. In 2006, the IMF organised a series of discussions with systemic players in order to devise a concerted solution to the problem of global imbalances. This initiative was an important step forward in itself, as it was a clear recognition that the system was not self-sustaining and that policy externalities on peers could be significant. However, the policy response by the parties involved in the IMF’s multilateral consultation process on global imbalances was lacklustre. The level of interconnectedness in the world economy means that policies inspired by the ‘put your house in order’ philosophy cannot insulate an individual economy from external shocks. In this context, the role for international policies is twofold. First, international cooperation can restore market confidence – the lack of which is an important source of contagion. Second, adopting a new regime of international cooperation to avert a new crisis would also benefit domestic financial and economic stability.The crisis was severe; it developed very rapidly and had a global impact. After the collapse of Lehman, the shock caused substantive real costs almost everywhere. China, too, was affected: exports fell considerably and took 13 months to reach their pre-crisis (October 2008) level again. That is why I consider global contagion one of the most striking features of the crisis. By using the word contagion, I want to emphasise that the crisis spread across countries in a way that went beyond what the traditional linkages, such as trade, or vulnerabilities implied by domestic fundamentals, would suggest. The way the crisis spread indicates the existence of an interconnectedness which enables the fast transmission of both positive and negative shocks across economies through multiple channels. I would emphasise the role of ‘confidence contagion’, in transmitting the crisis across the globe. After the collapse of Lehman, the steady worsening of the economic and financial environment in the shape of negative events that exceeded the most pessimistic expectations resulted in a situation of unprecedented ‘Knightian uncertainty’. This shows how the failure of a systemic market player, such as a major financial institution or a sovereign, can make it an extremely complex task to map and quantify risks and to identify credible scenarios. The way the crisis unfolded shows that such a situation can lead to multiple market failures.First, when uncertainty and risk aversion increase, international liquidity can dry up and investors can unwind in a disorderly way their positions with adverse consequences at global level.After the failure of Lehman, uncertainty about the solvency of counterparties led to a run on US money market funds. As a consequence, a global shortage of US dollars emerged, affecting banks in emerging market economies as well.Dysfunctional money markets and uncertainty about their own cash needs led banks to aggressively seek liquidity by unwinding their positions in several market segments. Furthermore, in an attempt to strengthen their capital bases in the view of adverse market conditions and potential losses, banks became more risk-averse and sold off risky assets, amplifying the initial shock. The resulting disorderly unwinding of the positions of international leveraged investors resulted in a sell-off of emerging market asset classes and a sharp depreciation in the currencies of these economies. Gross capital inflows went into reverse and financing conditions were tightened, reducing liquidity across market segments and raising bond yields in both international and local currencies.Second, uncertainty can also have other important real negative effects. Some studies highlight the role of uncertainty in business cycle fluctuations. For example, it has been shown that the collapse of stock prices in October 1929 generated temporary uncertainty about future income, which led consumers to forgo purchases of durable goods [3]. Additionally, theoretical and empirical studies show that major uncertainty shocks have a large real impact on the US economy, bringing about a substantial drop and rebound in output and employment. This occurs because higher uncertainty causes firms to suspend their investment and hiring. In turn, this affects consumer confidence and spending. Productivity growth also falls because this pause in activity freezes reallocation across units [4].We saw how this mechanism can work after the collapse of Lehman in September 2008. The high level of uncertainty froze investment and consumer spending in advanced economies. In this context, trade was hit very hard, due to a composition effect, as it mainly comprises durable goods [5]. The mounting expectations of a global slowdown caused a rapid decline of commodity prices which impacted heavily on commodity exporters.The shock to market confidence generated by the Greek downgrade has parallels with the Lehman collapse in September 2008. Also in that case, contagion caused tensions across markets and countries. This reinforces the idea that policies inspired by the ‘put your house in order’ philosophy are not enough to insulate a domestic economy from external shocks.The Greek credit rating downgrade last April took place in a weak environment, with international investors extremely sensitive to negative events. Confidence contagion spread the shock across the region. Financial tensions quickly propagated across market segments in Europe. Contagion from sovereign risk moved to the banking system as the market focused on the exposures of European banks to troubled euro area governments. The loss of confidence in the banking system led to new strains in money markets. Furthermore, the shock spread across the globe through a network of leveraged international investors who moved to safe havens as soon as the business climate deteriorated.On the eve of the first weekend in May financial markets were on the verge of a global contagion risk, with systemic implications. Correlation and volatility indicators increased to levels above those reached right after Lehman Brothers’ failure.In this context, the recent experience in Europe may illustrate how successful international cooperation can calm markets and halt contagion. To restore market confidence, the EU Member States agreed to establish a comprehensive package of measures, consisting mainly of three elements. First, it was agreed to speed up structural reforms and accelerate fiscal consolidation, especially in countries experiencing the strongest market pressures. Second, the ECOFIN Council adopted a regulation setting up the European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism (EFSM), which allows the European Commission to raise up to €60 billion for lending to troubled EU Member States. Third, euro area countries established the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) to provide loans of up to a total of €440 billion to euro area countries in difficulty, subject to strong policy conditionality in the context of joint euro area-IMF programmes. On 15 June, the EFSF agreement entered into force and on 4 August the Facility was activated. The IMF is also expected to contribute by providing financing amounting to at least half as much the euro area contribution to each programme. Both the EFSM and EFSF financial assistance will be subject to strong policy conditionality and take place in the context of joint EU-IMF programmes. These policy actions and the recent bank stress tests have succeeded in reducing market tensions and restoring confidence. I believe these policies were successful mainly because of the unprecedented and exemplary coordination at European level.The main lesson from the crisis is that global problems demand global solutions. We cannot get out of the crisis simply by maintaining the ‘put your house in order’ approach to international cooperation; it should be dealt with in a coordinated fashion. In this context, I would like to emphasise the following:It is clear that the global financial system cannot continue to effectively function under nationally based regulatory environments. This is why the work being conducted under the auspices of the G20 process on global principles for rules and regulations of various financial activities is important. For example, progress is being made by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) towards a new regime for bank capital and liquidity standards, with the broad aim being to raise both the quantity and quality of capital, to be implemented by end-2012. The Financial Stability Board (FSB) has devised a number of standards for sound compensation practices, and is cooperating with other relevant bodies to establish a single global accounting standard. Discussions under the G20 aegis are also ongoing in a number of other areas, including the expansion of the perimeter of regulation and supervision (e.g. hedge funds, credit rating agencies, over-the-counter derivatives), and the treatment of systemically important financial institutions, including ways for the financial sector to contribute to the costs associated with government interventions. It is essential that these global initiatives are brought to a successful conclusion so as to ensure a comprehensive and level playing field for all parties. In parallel, work is also under way to strengthen the existing framework for cooperation on financial regulation and supervision in Europe. Micro-prudential supervision is set to be reinforced with the creation of a European System of Financial Supervisors, including three new European Supervisory Agencies in banking, insurance, and securities. At the macro-prudential level, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) is soon to be established to conduct oversight of the EU financial system in order to prevent or mitigate systemic risks. In a global economy marked by increasing interconnectedness, the potential for negative cross-border spillovers is high, implying that the need to appropriately factor in negative externalities arising from policy choices is greater. This is why strong surveillance is essential in the system. The IMF has recently made several proposals in order to modernise surveillance, including producing spillover reports and adopting a multilateral surveillance decision. Fund staff have put forward these instruments in order to fill the existing ‘policy gap’ in the Fund’s bilateral surveillance. The gap means that member countries are not required to change their domestic policies as long as these are consistent with domestic stability, despite of their negative externalities for others. But policies cannot be judged only on the basis of countries’ best short-term interests, for if they undermine stability in other countries, they might ultimately have negative repercussions at home. These initiatives are welcome insofar as they go in the same direction and entail a more accountable system with an appropriate factoring-in of negative externalities.The Fund’s efforts to modernise its surveillance practices is welcome. Adopting a ‘multilateral perspective’ towards bilateral surveillance which systematically analyses inward and outward spillovers is one of the ‘surveillance priorities’ [6] identified by the Fund for the 2008-2011 period. Other surveillance areas targeted for improvement include the analysis of exchange rates and external stability risks, risk assessment, and financial sector surveillance and real-financial linkages. As far as Europe is concerned, the ECB has recently put forward a number of proposals [7] to reinforce the economic governance of the euro area. These include: i) strengthening surveillance over budgetary policies and more effective prevention/correction of excessive deficits and debts, inter alia through the quasi-automaticity of excessive deficit procedures and sanctions; ii) an improved framework for competitiveness surveillance and the correction of economic imbalances; and iii) the design of an appropriate euro area framework for crisis management. These proposals will be taken up by the taskforce chaired by European Council President Van Rompuy which is looking at economic governance in the European Union. The taskforce is expected to report to ministers by October 2010. The recent experience in the euro area also shows that surveillance cannot be ‘outsourced’ or delegated to markets. Markets can be very erratic and move in a discontinuous fashion. The trends in euro area bond markets before, during, and after the crisis suggest that markets tend to undervalue risk in ‘good times’ and overvalue it in ‘bad times’. This is why market surveillance can usefully complement, but not replace, enhanced surveillance by policy-makers themselves.In the aftermath of the crisis, peer-reviewed frameworks could help to steer policy-makers’ choices away from objectives which may appear beneficial in the short term but are ultimately unsustainable in the long term. In this context, the Mutual Assessment Process (MAP) for sustainable growth launched by the G20 is promising, as some weaknesses are better seen ‘from the outside’. In addition, peer-reviewed frameworks can also help countries to pool strengths and resources so as to better tackle common vulnerabilities, as European cooperation to solve the Greek crisis clearly demonstrated. A successful exit from the crisis requires not only an enhanced role for policy cooperation but also a new paradigm. For example, even if regulation and supervision are consistently strengthened at global level, the persistence of international imbalances (if left unaddressed) will continue to render the system vulnerable to crises. Policy-makers thus need to recognise the fact that the interconnected nature of today’s world economy requires a different way of addressing policies as well as a stronger role for cooperation. A system in which some policy-makers accept a degree of ‘intrusion’ into their policies as a quid pro quo for intruding into the policies of others, with externalities being internalised in domestic policy-making for the greater public good of global economic and financial stability.Let me conclude with some general observations on international policy cooperation. There is often a divide between theory and practice when discussing this issue. In theory, it is not difficult to demonstrate that international cooperation, by which countries internalise the external impact of their actions, and that of the others, before taking decisions, and subject themselves to international agreements, produces Pareto superior solutions. In practice, however, national policy-makers rarely subject their policies to international considerations and tend to take decisions purely with domestic interests in mind. Global problems require global and coordinated responses but, as the saying goes, “All politics is local” and thus decisions are often taken in a partial equilibrium context. How can we reconcile this dilemma?One way is to learn from experience. The recent crisis is largely a result of policy decisions which were taken without giving due consideration to the broader international environment and which frequently had very short-term objectives. There was no shortage of warnings. The multilateral consultation process, which involved five large economies in the context of the IMF in 2006-08 – in which both China and the euro area participated –pointed to the risk produced by growing imbalances and tried to focus the attention of policy-makers on longer-term policies necessary for achieving sustainable and balanced growth. However, little attention was given to these recommendations because there was no sense of urgency. The respective economies were still growing and there were no signs of crisis. The same applies today: as the world is gradually recovering from the crisis, the focus seems to have turned again towards very short-term targets related to growth and employment, but with little consideration paid to sustainability. There is a risk that the mistakes of the past will be quickly forgotten or even ignored as soon as conditions improve. Those who do not learn from past errors are condemned to repeat them.The alternative is to strengthen surveillance procedures and rule-based mechanisms which oblige policy-makers to pay more attention to external conditions and to medium-term objectives. This is the avenue we are following in the European Union. Stronger procedures to avoid nominal divergences within the euro area are currently being devised and a more rules-based implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact is in the process of being agreed by the Member States, in particular within the euro area. Stronger cooperation should not replace sound domestic policies, but these are easier to implement and to explain to the public if they are framed in a broader context. No crisis should be wasted – it is often said. We have to recognise the problems of the past, learn from them, and also be ready to implement changes in the way policies are carried out. This is important both at European and at global level, where much remains to be done to strengthen the procedures and institutions that form the basis for cooperation. I thank you for your attention.[1]I wish to thank Marcel Fratzscher, Marco Lo Duca and Francisco Ramón-Ballester for their contributions to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.[2]Obstfeld and Rogoff, “Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis: Products of Common Causes”, http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~obstfeld/santabarbara.pdf [3]Romer (1990), “The Great Crash and the Onset of the Great Depression”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 105, No. 3 (Aug., 1990), pp. 597-624[4]Bloom (2009), “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks”, Econometrica, Vol. 77, No. 3 (May, 2009), 623–685.[5]Brincongne, Fontagné, Gaulier, Taglioni and Vicard, “Firms and the Global Crisis: French Exports in the Turmoil”, Document de Travail n. 265, December 2009.[6]See https://www.imf.org/external/np/pdr/surv/2008/index.htm[7]See “Reinforcing Economic Governance in the Euro Area”, http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/reinforcingeconomicgovernanceintheeuroareaen.pdfReproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",strike featur crisi synchronis manner shock transmit across market segment countri key lesson crisi keep economi order necessarili insul extern shock excess focus domest economi may exacerb global econom financi imbal ultim make futur global crise like sever key challeng face global policymak make system safer avert futur crise new paradigm intern cooper thus requir global policymak one longerterm object sustain growth fulli internalis speech also highlight import peerreview mechan strong surveil context great pleasur share thought financi crisi focus talk today pick strike featur crisi draw lesson futur would choos term contagion contagion made crisi truli global synchronis manner shock transmit across market segment countri perhap distinguish crisi previous one grow interconnected world economi enabl crisi spread beyond would warrant fundament attain truli global dimens key messag us crisi keep economi order keep one hous order speak necessarili insul extern shock moreov excess focus domest economi may actual exacerb global econom financi imbal ultim make futur global crise like sever key challeng face global policymak make system safer avert futur crise countri immun strengthen intern cooper global econom financi sphere crucial policymak pay lipservic intern cooper year polici prescript common state let admit rare defin therein lie problem upper bound intern cooper determin advic put hous order understood way intern cooper exercis nation author sole respons identifi solv problem albeit process monitor parti advoc form cooper call tend cite advantag claim instanc nation author know best full sovereignti absenc fingerpoint increas chanc achiev cooper outcom moreov put hous order approach intern cooper neat provid recip correct action well blueprint sustain system parti manag keep hous order theori goe polici failur would occur negat spillov would contain crise would happen talk today would like explain system intern cooper built put hous order concept insuffici achiev global econom financi stabil outlin global root crisi particular lack coordin intern polici inspir precis put hous order approach intern cooper insuffici cooper evid number area instanc supervisori regulatori inconsist involv system player well lacklustr polici respons global imbal also review gap system turn help crisi spread global across segment countri suggest maintain precrisi mode cooper e one anticip keep bay troubl got cannot sustain recip recoveri argu new paradigm intern cooper requir global policymak one longerterm object sustain growth fulli internalis timeconsist manner conclud point import peerreview mechan strong surveil context also draw european experi end basic form crisi demonstr lack cooper various level crisi system display interest dichotomi financ increas global supervis regul larg remain nation scope loos coordin intern fact rule regul differ system player area bank capit liquid requir account standard thought problem long applic rulebook clear jurisdict consist put hous order premis intern cooper observ time paid attent appar contradict inher system hindsight shortcom result arrang evid diverg rule regul encourag regulatori arbitrag financi institut broad system equip cope intern natur crisi exampl absenc clear crossbord bank resolut framework europ condit author initi respons crisi field initi hesit nation charact absenc common rulebook global financi system exacerb weak put hous order categori includ poor risk manag institut generalis underestim risk lead overextend financi sector excess global imbal major role creat fragil led crisi polici inspir put hous order philosophi main determin global imbal lack mediumterm orient global coordin word polici excess shortterm fulli account knockon effect negat extern year prior characteris low financi market volatil risk premia across market segment low yield across matur spectrum environ bank investor engag search yield spur financi innov pace financi innov exceed supervisor market particip capac solv number valuat risk manag incent issu result high opaqu system credit risk distribut lowyield environ therefor play key role accumul fragil led crisi core macroeconom precondit global glut net save well liquid coupl lack safe financi asset global level save liquid glut larg outcom polici reinforc insuffici counter effect savingsinvest current account configur part respons creation global imbal lay countri underestim risk high consum indebted larg current account deficit howev exportl growth strategi pursu sever system import emerg market economi includ china also contribut substanti buildup fragil global level strategi intent led persist intervent foreign exchang market unilater basi accumul larg extern reserv reinvest borrow countri short term strategi generat growth economi howev sever negat effect domest global level domest led form financi underdevelop negat consequ capit alloc incom distribut global level exportl growth strategi made easi us incur larg increas current account deficit delay necessari adjust also gave rise accumul dollardenomin asset could reinvest emerg market economi due financi underdevelop form shortag safe financi asset moreov buildup asset result de facto taxat consumpt subsidi ineffici invest turn prevent effici intertempor smooth consumpt rebalanc growth toward domest demand factor contribut compress yield across matur spectrum accord averag estim pool studi central bank purchas us treasuri alon lower us longterm interest rate around basi point studi estim impact basi point surveil mechan put hous order heart prove weak runup crisi imf recognis surveil framework centr around put hous order insuffici meet demand world economi updat decis bilater surveil member polici place concept extern stabil countrylevel counterpart intern stabil heart decis also reaffirm fund surveil focus promot countri extern stabil examin whether countri exchang rate fiscal monetari financi sector polici consist object unfortun imf surveil decis never implement origin devis larg countri resist exchang rate label fundament misalign revis surveil guidelin shi away label effort reduc stigma therebi increas traction fund surveil policymak come back fund effort modernis surveil end talk weak surveil crisi appar multilater institut also region peerreview mechan one underpin econom govern euro area problem associ implement eu stabil growth pact sgp statist defici undermin confid greec salient exampl regard also come back later stage polici effort undertaken european author deal shortcom precrisi surveil fail attribut inadequ identif risk even polici prescript correct implement lag imf organis seri discuss system player order devis concert solut problem global imbal initi import step forward clear recognit system selfsustain polici extern peer could signific howev polici respons parti involv imf multilater consult process global imbal lacklustr level interconnected world economi mean polici inspir put hous order philosophi cannot insul individu economi extern shock context role intern polici twofold first intern cooper restor market confid lack import sourc contagion second adopt new regim intern cooper avert new crisi would also benefit domest financi econom stabil crisi sever develop rapid global impact collaps lehman shock caus substant real cost almost everywher china affect export fell consider took month reach precrisi octob level consid global contagion one strike featur crisi use word contagion want emphasis crisi spread across countri way went beyond tradit linkag trade vulner impli domest fundament would suggest way crisi spread indic exist interconnected enabl fast transmiss posit negat shock across economi multipl channel would emphasis role confid contagion transmit crisi across globe collaps lehman steadi worsen econom financi environ shape negat event exceed pessimist expect result situat unpreced knightian uncertainti show failur system market player major financi institut sovereign make extrem complex task map quantifi risk identifi credibl scenario way crisi unfold show situat lead multipl market failur first uncertainti risk avers increas intern liquid dri investor unwind disord way posit advers consequ global level failur lehman uncertainti solvenc counterparti led run us money market fund consequ global shortag us dollar emerg affect bank emerg market economi well dysfunct money market uncertainti cash need led bank aggress seek liquid unwind posit sever market segment furthermor attempt strengthen capit base view advers market condit potenti loss bank becam riskavers sold riski asset amplifi initi shock result disord unwind posit intern leverag investor result selloff emerg market asset class sharp depreci currenc economi gross capit inflow went revers financ condit tighten reduc liquid across market segment rais bond yield intern local currenc second uncertainti also import real negat effect studi highlight role uncertainti busi cycl fluctuat exampl shown collaps stock price octob generat temporari uncertainti futur incom led consum forgo purchas durabl good addit theoret empir studi show major uncertainti shock larg real impact us economi bring substanti drop rebound output employ occur higher uncertainti caus firm suspend invest hire turn affect consum confid spend product growth also fall paus activ freez realloc across unit saw mechan work collaps lehman septemb high level uncertainti froze invest consum spend advanc economi context trade hit hard due composit effect main compris durabl good mount expect global slowdown caus rapid declin commod price impact heavili commod export shock market confid generat greek downgrad parallel lehman collaps septemb also case contagion caus tension across market countri reinforc idea polici inspir put hous order philosophi enough insul domest economi extern shock greek credit rate downgrad last april took place weak environ intern investor extrem sensit negat event confid contagion spread shock across region financi tension quick propag across market segment europ contagion sovereign risk move bank system market focus exposur european bank troubl euro area govern loss confid bank system led new strain money market furthermor shock spread across globe network leverag intern investor move safe haven soon busi climat deterior eve first weekend may financi market verg global contagion risk system implic correl volatil indic increas level reach right lehman brother failur context recent experi europ may illustr success intern cooper calm market halt contagion restor market confid eu member state agre establish comprehens packag measur consist main three element first agre speed structur reform acceler fiscal consolid especi countri experienc strongest market pressur second ecofin council adopt regul set european financi stabilis mechan efsm allow european commiss rais billion lend troubl eu member state third euro area countri establish european financi stabil facil efsf provid loan total billion euro area countri difficulti subject strong polici condit context joint euro areaimf programm june efsf agreement enter forc august facil activ imf also expect contribut provid financ amount least half much euro area contribut programm efsm efsf financi assist subject strong polici condit take place context joint euimf programm polici action recent bank stress test succeed reduc market tension restor confid believ polici success main unpreced exemplari coordin european level main lesson crisi global problem demand global solut cannot get crisi simpli maintain put hous order approach intern cooper dealt coordin fashion context would like emphasis follow clear global financi system cannot continu effect function nation base regulatori environ work conduct auspic g process global principl rule regul various financi activ import exampl progress made basel committe bank supervis bcbs toward new regim bank capit liquid standard broad aim rais quantiti qualiti capit implement end financi stabil board fsb devis number standard sound compens practic cooper relev bodi establish singl global account standard discuss g aegi also ongo number area includ expans perimet regul supervis e g hedg fund credit rate agenc overthecount deriv treatment system import financi institut includ way financi sector contribut cost associ govern intervent essenti global initi brought success conclus ensur comprehens level play field parti parallel work also way strengthen exist framework cooper financi regul supervis europ microprudenti supervis set reinforc creation european system financi supervisor includ three new european supervisori agenc bank insur secur macroprudenti level european system risk board esrb soon establish conduct oversight eu financi system order prevent mitig system risk global economi mark increas interconnected potenti negat crossbord spillov high impli need appropri factor negat extern aris polici choic greater strong surveil essenti system imf recent made sever propos order modernis surveil includ produc spillov report adopt multilater surveil decis fund staff put forward instrument order fill exist polici gap fund bilater surveil gap mean member countri requir chang domest polici long consist domest stabil despit negat extern other polici cannot judg basi countri best shortterm interest undermin stabil countri might ultim negat repercuss home initi welcom insofar go direct entail account system appropri factoringin negat extern fund effort modernis surveil practic welcom adopt multilater perspect toward bilater surveil systemat analys inward outward spillov one surveil prioriti identifi fund period surveil area target improv includ analysi exchang rate extern stabil risk risk assess financi sector surveil realfinanci linkag far europ concern ecb recent put forward number propos reinforc econom govern euro area includ strengthen surveil budgetari polici effect preventioncorrect excess deficit debt inter alia quasiautomat excess deficit procedur sanction ii improv framework competit surveil correct econom imbal iii design appropri euro area framework crisi manag propos taken taskforc chair european council presid van rompuy look econom govern european union taskforc expect report minist octob recent experi euro area also show surveil cannot outsourc deleg market market errat move discontinu fashion trend euro area bond market crisi suggest market tend undervalu risk good time overvalu bad time market surveil use complement replac enhanc surveil policymak aftermath crisi peerreview framework could help steer policymak choic away object may appear benefici short term ultim unsustain long term context mutual assess process map sustain growth launch g promis weak better seen outsid addit peerreview framework also help countri pool strength resourc better tackl common vulner european cooper solv greek crisi clear demonstr success exit crisi requir enhanc role polici cooper also new paradigm exampl even regul supervis consist strengthen global level persist intern imbal left unaddress continu render system vulner crise policymak thus need recognis fact interconnect natur today world economi requir differ way address polici well stronger role cooper system policymak accept degre intrus polici quid pro quo intrud polici other extern internalis domest policymak greater public good global econom financi stabil let conclud general observ intern polici cooper often divid theori practic discuss issu theori difficult demonstr intern cooper countri internalis extern impact action other take decis subject intern agreement produc pareto superior solut practic howev nation policymak rare subject polici intern consider tend take decis pure domest interest mind global problem requir global coordin respons say goe polit local thus decis often taken partial equilibrium context reconcil dilemma one way learn experi recent crisi larg result polici decis taken without give due consider broader intern environ frequent shortterm object shortag warn multilater consult process involv five larg economi context imf china euro area particip point risk produc grow imbal tri focus attent policymak longerterm polici necessari achiev sustain balanc growth howev littl attent given recommend sens urgenc respect economi still grow sign crisi appli today world gradual recov crisi focus seem turn toward shortterm target relat growth employ littl consider paid sustain risk mistak past quick forgotten even ignor soon condit improv learn past error condemn repeat altern strengthen surveil procedur rulebas mechan oblig policymak pay attent extern condit mediumterm object avenu follow european union stronger procedur avoid nomin diverg within euro area current devis rulesbas implement stabil growth pact process agre member state particular within euro area stronger cooper replac sound domest polici easier implement explain public frame broader context crisi wast often said recognis problem past learn also readi implement chang way polici carri import european global level much remain done strengthen procedur institut form basi cooper thank attent wish thank fratzscher marco lo duca francisco ramónballest contribut speech remain sole respons opinion contain herein obstfeld rogoff global imbal financi crisi product common caus http elsa berkeley edu obstfeldsantabarbara pdf romer great crash onset great depress quarter journal econom vol aug pp bloom impact uncertainti shock econometrica vol may brincongn fontagné gaulier taglioni vicard firm global crisi french export turmoil document de travail n decemb see https www imf orgexternalnppdrsurv index htm see reinforc econom govern euro area http www ecb intpubpdfotherreinforcingeconomicgovernanceintheeuroareaen pdfreproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en