Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Recent advances in modelling systemic risk using network analysis,05-10-2009,European Central Bank,ECB,2294,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,I would like to welcome you to the workshop on “Recent advances in modelling systemic risk using network analysis” here at the ECB. A workshop on systemic risk that provides an analytical focus on the financial sector as a network of financial agents could not come at a more timely moment. In 1896 the German sociologist Georg Simmel stated in his book “The Philosophy of Money”: “money is the spider that spins society’s web”. With this, Simmel already at the time pointed to the network aspect of money, how financial innovation can transform the economy and society; and the transformation process as changes in the complexity, size and nature of economic and societal networks. The recent financial crisis has strikingly illustrated the interconnectedness that characterises the global financial system. In providing a framework for strengthening financial stability, policy-makers are currently not only refining the regulatory and institutional set-up, but also looking for new analytical tools that help to better identify, monitor and address sources of systemic risk. Therefore, I believe network analysis can make a relevant contribution and I am delighted that you have come together today to present and discuss new work in this field.Let me give you three questions (from the perspective of a policy-maker) which today’s workshop would ideally shed light on:What are the key channels and systemically important players that need special attention?How can macro-prudential supervision take the interconnectedness into account? And can network methodologies provide us with a useful tool in this respect?With these questions in mind, I have structured my introductory remarks into three parts. I will first give a short assessment of the relevance of systemic risk in the modern financial system. Then I will discuss the use of network theories for the analysis of systemic risk. Finally, I will briefly refer to network applications to payment and financial systems. Systemic risk refers to the possibility that a triggering event such as a bank failure or a market disruption could cause widespread disruption of the financial system, including significant difficulties in otherwise viable institutions or markets. Preventing these negative externalities from impairing the functioning of the system and from spilling over to the real economy is a crucial element of the mission of central banks and of supervisory authorities.In the last two years, the functioning of the global financial system has been challenged by an extraordinary sequence of such triggering events. This brought to the fore how complex and interconnected the financial system had become and, consequently, how problems in one part of the system could reach other parts, also very distant ones.In July and August 2007 the asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) market collapsed when investors realised that money market mutual funds had invested in paper backed by sub-prime assets. Investors became suddenly distrustful of all forms of private credit, especially structured products and other complex and opaque instruments, and this caused the funding for structured investment vehicles and special-purpose vehicles to dry up. Difficulties faced by conduits and other asset-backed programmes in rolling over their short-term funding forced them to look to bank sponsors for liquidity (this was the case, for instance, for IKB and Sachsen LB in Germany) or to sell assets. A crisis of confidence ensued which gripped money market mutual funds and the commercial paper market, notwithstanding their distance from the US housing market.Such unstable dynamics, set off by increasing uncertainty about the size of losses in the system and, maybe more importantly, about their exact location, continued in the course of 2008. Then, the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008 transformed a pessimistic and disoriented mood into full-blown panic and paralysis. [1]The biggest negative surprise following Lehman Brothers’ default was its effect on money market funds. When one fund, Reserve Primary, “broke the buck” (that is, the value of investors’ money fell below the notional amount invested), the sector was hit by a wave of redemptions that fuelled instability in the credit markets. Again, banks and companies relying on short-term funding through commercial paper or ABCP (i.e. debt backed by mortgages, credit cards and other consumer loans) could not roll over their debt, except at overnight maturities.The ensuing dynamics in market participants’ behaviour clearly illustrate the presence of knock-on effects, negative externalities, and a coordination failure in the market network. Each institution responded rationally given individually available information. However, each rational response had repercussions for the whole system.The impact of systemic risk depends very much on the collective behaviour of financial institutions and their interconnectedness, as well as on the interaction between financial markets and the macroeconomy. Systemic stability is a public good. The recognition of this public good property underpins the recent emphasis on a macro-prudential approach to regulation and supervision.From a micro-prudential perspective, a strengthened supervision of individual institutions’ risk-taking incentives is also important. A key element of the risk management framework of banks is that they take into account, in terms of credit and liquidity risks, the exposure they have to particular (potentially systemically relevant) counterparties. Systemic risk is, generally, outside the control of each individual institution. But, by keeping liquidity buffers and capital reserves and by limiting large exposures and addressing dependencies, banks can contribute to an increase in the resilience of the system as a whole. The financial crisis has reminded us how important it is to look at the links and connections of the financial system. We saw that major disruptions such as failure or a near failure of certain institutions rapidly spilled over to the whole financial system. Therefore, network theory can help us to analyze the systemic risk of such disruptions (i) by looking at how resilient the system is to contagion; and (ii) what the major triggers and channels of contagion are.An important aspect of the analysis of systemic risk is that an apparently robust system may in fact be very fragile. This comes from the fact that a high number of interconnections within the network will serve as shock-amplifiers rather than as absorbers.Another key aspect of the analysis is that within the network of the financial system, there are players with only a few connections, but also players that are highly connected. Obviously, such networks are extremely vulnerable if those highly connected players are disrupted. In fact, when a shock hits the system, the number of affected players can be especially low, but still propagate system-wide. Payment systems, for instance, are networks with such a property. [2] Clearly, large and highly connected financial institutions are systemically important. This has important implications for macro-prudential surveillance, and hence for financial stability. Network analysis is crucial for the identification of such systemically important institutions and markets which are critical market players in the web of exposures. Monoline insurance providers and AIG provided an example of such critical players; key custodian banks or large correspondent banks play a similar role. Let me add to this, that a particular institution might not only be critical to the functioning of financial markets or market infrastructures because other institutions are financially exposed to it, but also because other market participants rely on the continued provision of its services. For us as policymakers this is a crucial point, as the impact of a failure of a given market player also hinges on the ability of the financial infrastructure to support its resolution and to facilitate the orderly unwinding of positions. So let me now turn to the specific application of network theory to payment and financial systems.Research in network theory has received relatively little attention in economics until the last decade. Therefore, I am delighted to see that this literature is growing and today’s workshop clearly illustrates its growing importance. The papers from today’s program highlight how direct and indirect interlinkages and contagion dynamics among financial institutions, as well as among institutions, markets and infrastructures, can be significantly influenced by three important network characteristics: First, the degree of connectivity, second, the degree of concentration and third, the size of exposures. We see from the papers that network analysis can help to better understand the interlinkages and systemic connections in many different segments of the financial markets, ranging from money markets to networks of credit default swaps (CDSs), and from large-value payment systems to cross-sector exposures in the euro area financial system.We see that this research gives important insights into the various amplification mechanisms in the global web of financial connections. Such amplification very much depends on a number of factors, such as the size of aggregate macroeconomic shocks, asset price volatility, liquidity risk and financial leverage. Moreover, network analysis can be used to simulate the effect of credit and funding shocks on banking and financial stability by taking into account – beyond the direct balance sheet exposures – also the impact of contingent claims and credit risk transfer techniques.I am glad that the workshop brings together a wide variety of applications. It demonstrates two key points: first, network analysis is advancing as a common tool for assessing dynamics within the various parts of the financial sector (from payment systems to interbank balance sheet exposures); and second, it reveals that a truly systemic perspective needs to combine the focus on various parts of the financial sector with an analysis of the interlinkages among them, ideally including the interaction with the real economy. This is, of course, an ambitious objective that calls for further research. Let me conclude. The recent financial crisis has underscored the need for policy-makers and regulators worldwide to track systemic linkages.Network analysis offers a very relevant tool for addressing this challenge. Its focus on interconnectedness and on systemically important market players makes it especially relevant for the assessment of the fragility or resilience of the financial system as a whole. By applying network theories we can benefit from the important progress made in other sciences to monitor and assess systemic risks, direct and indirect linkages, vulnerabilities and contagion. This is because networks allow us to look beyond the immediate “point of impact” of a shock, hence, also to the spillovers likely to arise from interlinkages in the system. Thus, network analysis can undoubtedly provide useful guidance for the analysis of systemic risk and can be a key tool for the future analysis of such risk. For us, such analysis will be of crucial importance. As you know a European Systemic Risk Board will be established with the mandate to map financial risks and their concentration at the system level for the macro-prudential supervision of systemic stability. The mandates of other supranational institutions and fora, such as the IMF and the Financial Stability Board, also refer to network aspects of the financial system that have become apparent during the current crisis and that should be taken into account in order to obtain new measures of financial fragility. [3] Also for the specific field of market infrastructures the relevance of network effects are being taken into account. The market for credit default swaps (CDS) has clearly revealed its systemic importance, as the default of one major counterparty has put the whole system under severe strain. Therefore, I welcome very much that central counterparties for credit default swaps have been established to address first, the high degree of interconnectivity between CDS markets and credit and cash securities markets, second, the high leverage embedded in these financial instruments, and third, the significant concentration of related risks in a small group of major market players. Effective implementation of central clearing of derivatives enables a significant reduction in counterparty risk, hence addressing some of the negative externalities that stem from the over-the-counter network that has formed over the years. [4]Interlinkages within the financial system are nothing fundamentally new. However, business strategies developed by financial institutions over the last 20 years and financial innovations have made the system much more interconnected, complex and opaque than it was in the past. I believe that policy-makers and regulators of today will be judged in the future on the basis of the regulatory measures and analytical tools they have applied to address the root causes of the crisis. A key challenge is to transcend a purely national or sector-specific perspective and to take an approach that matches the global nature of financial networks. A key prerequisite for network analysis as a surveillance tool remains, however, the availability of relevant data. This holds true especially on a cross-border basis, but also at bank level. Going forward, regulators and overseers should continue to develop ways to systematically collect and analyse data. The crisis has clearly demonstrated that data confidentiality must not stand in the way of improvements in systemic risk analysis and assessment by policy-makers. Once more, I welcome you to this workshop and I wish you productive and enriching discussions on this very relevant topic.[1] G. Tett (2009), “Markets 12 months after Lehman collapse”, Financial Times, 9 September.[2] See M. Pröpper et al. (2008), “Towards a network description of interbank payment flows”, DNB Working Paper No. 177, for an analysis of Dutch payment flows; C. Puhr and S. W. Schmitz (2009), “Structure and stability in payment networks – a panel data analysis of ARTIS simulations” in H. Leinonen (ed.), Simulation analyses and stress testing of payment networks, Bank of Finland, for the Austrian large-value payment system; and K. Soramäki et al. (2007), “The topology of interbank payment flows”, Physica A, Vol. 379, pp. 317-333, for an analysis of Fedwire, the large-value payment system operated by the Federal Reserve.[3] See IMF (2009), “Global Financial Stability Report”, Chapter II on Assessing the Systemic Implications of Financial Linkages, April, and E. Nier et al. (2007), “Network models and financial stability”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 31, pp. 2033-2060.[4] See also ECB (2009), “OTC derivatives and post-trading infrastructures”, September.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen would like welcom workshop recent advanc model system risk use network analysi ecb workshop system risk provid analyt focus financi sector network financi agent could come time moment german sociologist georg simmel state book philosophi money money spider spin societi web simmel alreadi time point network aspect money financi innov transform economi societi transform process chang complex size natur econom societ network recent financi crisi strike illustr interconnected characteris global financi system provid framework strengthen financi stabil policymak current refin regulatori institut setup also look new analyt tool help better identifi monitor address sourc system risk therefor believ network analysi make relev contribut delight come togeth today present discuss new work field let give three question perspect policymak today workshop would ideal shed light key channel system import player need special attent macroprudenti supervis take interconnected account network methodolog provid us use tool respect question mind structur introductori remark three part first give short assess relev system risk modern financi system discuss use network theori analysi system risk final briefli refer network applic payment financi system system risk refer possibl trigger event bank failur market disrupt could caus widespread disrupt financi system includ signific difficulti otherwis viabl institut market prevent negat extern impair function system spill real economi crucial element mission central bank supervisori author last two year function global financi system challeng extraordinari sequenc trigger event brought fore complex interconnect financi system becom consequ problem one part system could reach part also distant one juli august assetback commerci paper abcp market collaps investor realis money market mutual fund invest paper back subprim asset investor becam sudden distrust form privat credit especi structur product complex opaqu instrument caus fund structur invest vehicl specialpurpos vehicl dri difficulti face conduit assetback programm roll shortterm fund forc look bank sponsor liquid case instanc ikb sachsen lb germani sell asset crisi confid ensu grip money market mutual fund commerci paper market notwithstand distanc us hous market unstabl dynam set increas uncertainti size loss system mayb import exact locat continu cours collaps lehman brother septemb transform pessimist disori mood fullblown panic paralysi biggest negat surpris follow lehman brother default effect money market fund one fund reserv primari broke buck valu investor money fell notion amount invest sector hit wave redempt fuell instabl credit market bank compani reli shortterm fund commerci paper abcp e debt back mortgag credit card consum loan could roll debt except overnight matur ensu dynam market particip behaviour clear illustr presenc knockon effect negat extern coordin failur market network institut respond ration given individu avail inform howev ration respons repercuss whole system impact system risk depend much collect behaviour financi institut interconnected well interact financi market macroeconomi system stabil public good recognit public good properti underpin recent emphasi macroprudenti approach regul supervis microprudenti perspect strengthen supervis individu institut risktak incent also import key element risk manag framework bank take account term credit liquid risk exposur particular potenti system relev counterparti system risk general outsid control individu institut keep liquid buffer capit reserv limit larg exposur address depend bank contribut increas resili system whole financi crisi remind us import look link connect financi system saw major disrupt failur near failur certain institut rapid spill whole financi system therefor network theori help us analyz system risk disrupt look resili system contagion ii major trigger channel contagion import aspect analysi system risk appar robust system may fact fragil come fact high number interconnect within network serv shockamplifi rather absorb anoth key aspect analysi within network financi system player connect also player high connect obvious network extrem vulner high connect player disrupt fact shock hit system number affect player especi low still propag systemwid payment system instanc network properti clear larg high connect financi institut system import import implic macroprudenti surveil henc financi stabil network analysi crucial identif system import institut market critic market player web exposur monolin insur provid aig provid exampl critic player key custodian bank larg correspond bank play similar role let add particular institut might critic function financi market market infrastructur institut financi expos also market particip reli continu provis servic us policymak crucial point impact failur given market player also hing abil financi infrastructur support resolut facilit order unwind posit let turn specif applic network theori payment financi system research network theori receiv relat littl attent econom last decad therefor delight see literatur grow today workshop clear illustr grow import paper today program highlight direct indirect interlinkag contagion dynam among financi institut well among institut market infrastructur signific influenc three import network characterist first degre connect second degre concentr third size exposur see paper network analysi help better understand interlinkag system connect mani differ segment financi market rang money market network credit default swap cdss largevalu payment system crosssector exposur euro area financi system see research give import insight various amplif mechan global web financi connect amplif much depend number factor size aggreg macroeconom shock asset price volatil liquid risk financi leverag moreov network analysi use simul effect credit fund shock bank financi stabil take account beyond direct balanc sheet exposur also impact conting claim credit risk transfer techniqu glad workshop bring togeth wide varieti applic demonstr two key point first network analysi advanc common tool assess dynam within various part financi sector payment system interbank balanc sheet exposur second reveal truli system perspect need combin focus various part financi sector analysi interlinkag among ideal includ interact real economi cours ambiti object call research let conclud recent financi crisi underscor need policymak regul worldwid track system linkag network analysi offer relev tool address challeng focus interconnected system import market player make especi relev assess fragil resili financi system whole appli network theori benefit import progress made scienc monitor assess system risk direct indirect linkag vulner contagion network allow us look beyond immedi point impact shock henc also spillov like aris interlinkag system thus network analysi undoubt provid use guidanc analysi system risk key tool futur analysi risk us analysi crucial import know european system risk board establish mandat map financi risk concentr system level macroprudenti supervis system stabil mandat supran institut fora imf financi stabil board also refer network aspect financi system becom appar current crisi taken account order obtain new measur financi fragil also specif field market infrastructur relev network effect taken account market credit default swap cds clear reveal system import default one major counterparti put whole system sever strain therefor welcom much central counterparti credit default swap establish address first high degre interconnect cds market credit cash secur market second high leverag embed financi instrument third signific concentr relat risk small group major market player effect implement central clear deriv enabl signific reduct counterparti risk henc address negat extern stem overthecount network form year interlinkag within financi system noth fundament new howev busi strategi develop financi institut last year financi innov made system much interconnect complex opaqu past believ policymak regul today judg futur basi regulatori measur analyt tool appli address root caus crisi key challeng transcend pure nation sectorspecif perspect take approach match global natur financi network key prerequisit network analysi surveil tool remain howev avail relev data hold true especi crossbord basi also bank level go forward regul overs continu develop way systemat collect analys data crisi clear demonstr data confidenti must stand way improv system risk analysi assess policymak welcom workshop wish product enrich discuss relev topic g tett market month lehman collaps financi time septemb see m pröpper et al toward network descript interbank payment flow dnb work paper analysi dutch payment flow c puhr w schmitz structur stabil payment network panel data analysi arti simul h leinonen ed simul analys stress test payment network bank finland austrian largevalu payment system k soramäki et al topolog interbank payment flow physica vol pp analysi fedwir largevalu payment system oper feder reserv see imf global financi stabil report chapter ii assess system implic financi linkag april e nier et al network model financi stabil journal econom dynam control vol pp see also ecb otc deriv posttrad infrastructur septemb reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en