José Manuel González-Páramo: The regulatory and supervisory reform in Europe,22-01-2010,European Central Bank,ECB,2202,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen, [1]I am very glad to participate this morning in the presentation of the latest “Observatorio” from the Fundación de Estudios Financieros (FEF). [2] This year’s report is dedicated to the very important issue of the Reform of the European Financial Markets. The current financial crisis has revealed a number of deficiencies in the European and international regulatory framework, which need to be addressed in order to place our financial systems and economies on a more solid footing.As a result, a number of initiatives have been undertaken in the relevant European and international fora. The number and breadth of these initiatives is impressive and very promising. The report from FEF provides a very comprehensive survey of all the current initiatives, identifying the various strands of work and summarising the main implications for the financial sector and markets. I congratulate the authors on this exhaustive report, which represents a very useful reference for whoever is interested in understanding the ongoing developments in the regulatory and supervisory field. Of course, the reader may not necessarily agree with all conclusions of the report. In particular, the report identifies a major risk of over-regulation and instead stresses the virtues from industry self-regulation. I beg to disagree. In my view, the main risk right now is not to do too much, but rather that we do too little. There is a serious risk that the gradual improvement of conditions in the financial markets and the banking industry may diminish the sense of urgency and necessity of implementing reforms identified as essential to prevent the occurrence of similar crises in the future. Albert Hirschman, the American economist, noted that in many of the debates that precede social and political reforms of historical magnitude, the proposed changes are typically met with three arguments: (1) that they would produce perverse effects, (2) that they would be ineffectual, and (3) that they would jeopardise previous achievements. [3] I am afraid that we are now increasingly hearing the same arguments in the context of the debate on financial reform. The crisis which began in the summer of 2007 has developed over time into one of the most disruptive and costly crises for our economies and societies that the world has experienced in many decades. Therefore, both public authorities and the financial market participants have a collective responsibility to do whatever is needed to address weaknesses in the regulatory and supervisory framework in order to provide sounder foundations to our financial systems. Let me now stress some of the areas in which substantial work has been achieved to design and implement reforms.As I mentioned earlier, substantive progress has been made in the regulatory and supervisory reform as a response to the financial crisis. A remarkable amount of technical work has been undertaken in a demanding timeframe. All relevant initiatives have been coordinated globally, and the European Union has been a frontrunner in a number key areas. Three areas in which much progress has been made are: credit rating agencies, hedge funds and compensation practices. As regards credit rating agencies, a new EU regulation subjecting such agencies to mandatory registration and oversight in order to increase transparency and reduce conflicts of interest in the rating process has already entered into force in December 2009. As for hedge funds, the European Commission has proposed a Directive on alternative investment fund managers. This proposal, which is currently under debate, provides that alternative investment fund managers be subject to authorisation and harmonised regulatory standards, including minimum capital as well as disclosure requirements. On compensation practices, the European Commission was among the first to incorporate in a Directive proposal the Principles developed by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) for sound compensation practices, with a projected implementation date of end-2010. In this context, the EU was leading the international agenda in developing further guidance to align compensation practices with long-term value creation and discourage excessive risk-taking in the short-term. To recall, the G20 leaders in Pittsburgh in September endorsed the FSB implementation standards that aim to defer bonus payments, disallow guaranteed bonuses, and introduce a claw-back clause.In addition, agreement has been reached globally on a comprehensive set of measures to strengthen the prudential framework in response to the crisis. In the EU, the Commission’s proposal for an amendment of the Capital Requirements Directive of July 2009 includes the internationally agreed stricter requirements for trading book and re-securitisations. Moreover, the recently issued proposals of the Basel Committee aim at improving the quality, consistency and transparency of capital for credit institutions as well as developing a framework for liquidity risk. As a consequence, the quality of capital, especially the so called Tier-1 capital which is of utmost importance for loss-absorption on going concern and crisis situations, will significantly improve. The risk coverage of capital requirements will be further strengthened for the counterparty risk related to derivatives, repos and securities financing activities, and incentives will be increased to move OTC derivative exposures to central counterparties and exchanges. A leverage ratio will be introduced as a supplementary measure to the Basel II risk control framework to curb excessive balance sheet growth and to safeguard against model risk and measurement error.  Capital buffers and forward-looking provisioning will be introduced to mitigate the inherent procyclical nature of financial activities. Finally, a global minimum liquidity risk standard for internationally active banks will be put in place, requiring banks to hold sufficient high-quality liquid assets to withstand financial stress. These proposed measures have the support of the Group of Central Bank Governors and Heads of Supervision, who requested the Committee to deliver a fully calibrated and finalised package of reforms by the end of 2010. The Commission envisages the timely incorporation of the aforementioned upcoming regulatory changes in the EU framework. Finally, international cooperation has been strongly reinforced and supervisory colleges for large complex financial groups have been established. At EU level, the setting up and functioning of colleges is provided for in the EU regulatory framework and is well advanced. Looking ahead, legislative proposals should fully reflect the ongoing work at international and EU level aiming at enhancing the resilience of the financial system and protect consumers and investors against the impact of excessive risk taking and irresponsible market practices. Main priorities include: (1) finalising the reform of the prudential framework; (2) addressing the risks posed by systemically important institutions; and (3) setting a framework for macro-prudential supervision. First, the strengthened prudential framework currently being developed needs to be properly and timely finalised. The agreed measures, when implemented, will address many of the shortcoming highlighted by the financial crisis, and will increase the ability of financial institutions to withstand shocks and thus the resilience of the financial system. In this context, let me highlight the importance of a thorough impact assessment, to be carried out in the course of this year, before the final calibration of the framework can be made. The exact timing of implementation has, equally, to be carefully considered, so that the economic and financial recovery will not be endangered. In this context, adequate transition and grandfathering arrangements should be ensured. Second, legislative reform also needs to address the moral hazard stemming from systemically important financial institutions. In a resilient financial system it cannot and should not be taken for granted that authorities will always come to the rescue. The focus of the ongoing work by the FSB in this regard is threefold: It seeks to ensure that financial institutions, whatever their size and interconnectedness, should not cause undue distress to the functioning of the financial system and to the economy as a whole, if and when mismanagement drive them to bankruptcy. Possible tools include introducing capital and liquidity surcharges, or constraining size or the range of activities, to reduce the externalities of systemically important institutions to the society. The core financial infrastructures and markets need to be strengthened, for example via the promotion of central counterparty clearing and revision of supervisory standards on financial market infrastructures. We also need to review resolution regimes and bankruptcy laws to ensure an orderly winding-down of systemic cross-border financial institutions. In this respect, the European Commission has already launched a public consultation on measures for a new EU framework for crisis management in the banking sector, in which policy options as regards early intervention, bank resolution and harmonised insolvency procedures are considered. In addition, it will be relevant to enhance the framework for coordination among the relevant authorities for financial stability in case of crisis. The third and final area relates to macro-prudential supervision. One of the key lessons stemming from the financial crisis relates to the importance of understanding and assessing the degree of “interconnectedness” between market participants. In particular, the crisis demonstrated that the nature and magnitude of the systemic risk in the financial sector is related not only to the potential illiquidity or insolvency of large banks or other major regulated financial institutions, but it also depends on the close intertwining between financial institutions, markets and infrastructures. The financial stability framework needs to be able to identify and assess systemic risks corresponding to the degree of “interconnectedness” I just mentioned. In this context, macro-prudential oversight would focus on factors and risks that can affect the stability of the financial system as a whole and therefore would complement micro-prudential supervision, which looks at the stability of individual financial institutions.Macroprudential oversight will be the key task of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), which is built on the proposals of the High Level Group chaired by Jacques de Larosière. The European Commission’s legislative proposals for the establishment and functioning of the ESRB have received the support by the ECOFIN and the EU Council. The European Parliament is currently considering the proposals in its turn. Let me also mention that the ECB/Eurosystem expressed its stance in the opinion adopted on 26 October. 2009 It welcomed the broad agreement reached by ECOFIN on the draft legal texts regarding the establishment of the ESRB and the involvement of the ECB in supporting the ESRB. As stated in its Opinion, the ECB has decided that it stands ready to provide the analytical, statistical, administrative and logistical support to the ESRB, including the Secretariat of the ESRB. What will be the activities of the ESRB and what is its value added? The ESRB will be expected to actively monitor the various sources of risk to financial stability in the EU – across countries and across financial sectors, and also taking into account global developments. As a result of this monitoring, the ESRB can identify the risks and analyse in-depth how they could impact the financial system. Stress-testing and other methodologies could assist the risk prioritisation exercise. The value-added to be provided by the ESRB is to link, in particular, macro-economic conditions, structural developments, and key vulnerabilities of financial institutions. This will permit to identify system-wide risks for the benefit of regulatory and supervisory policies. The monitoring, assessment and collection of information on sources of risk to be conducted by the ESRB, at the level of the entire EU, is of the essence, given the advanced financial integration of the internal market. In addition, the risks for Europe stemming from global sources will also need to be considered, also in coordination with the IMF and the FSB. The financial stability monitoring in the EU as a whole will provide significant analytical and informational challenges. A large part of the effectiveness of the ESRB will rely on the quality and solidity of the analysis and information underlying its financial stability assessments. It will be important to set-up efficient arrangements between the ESRB and the new European Supervisory Authorities for the mutual cooperation and exchange of information, as foreseen in the Commission’s legislative proposals. This would allow avoiding multiple reporting from financial institutions.In order to support the new European macro-prudential function, as decided by the Ecofin, the ECB will provide analytical, statistical, administrative and logistical support, also drawing on the technical advice of the 27 national central banks and supervisors of the Member States. Accordingly, we will optimise our present capabilities and infrastructure in the areas of financial stability monitoring, macro-economic analysis, and collection of statistical information, to the benefit of the ESRB. This aims at reaping the maximum synergies in terms of expertise, resources and infrastructures with the existing central bank activities in the EU. To this aim, preparatory work is already under way. Let me now conclude by saying that although much has been achieved to improve the European regulatory and supervisory framework, a lot still remains to be done. This is no time for complacency. We still need to make further progress to create a supervisory and regulatory framework, both micro and macroprudential, in which a strong and competitive financial system can enjoy sustainable growth. Europe should play a leading role in these developments. Thank you for your attention.[1]I am very grateful to Katri Mikkonen for valuable inputs and to Fátima Pires, Fabio Recine and Panagiotis Strouzas for useful comments.[2]Fundación de Estudios Financieros (2009), Observatorio sobre la Reforma de los Mercados Financieros Europeos, Papeles de la Fundación N. 34.[3]Albert O. Hirschman (1991), The Rethoric of Reaction: Perversity, Futility, Jeopardy, Cambridge MA; Harvard University Press. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen glad particip morn present latest observatorio fundación de estudio financiero fef year report dedic import issu reform european financi market current financi crisi reveal number defici european intern regulatori framework need address order place financi system economi solid foot result number initi undertaken relev european intern fora number breadth initi impress promis report fef provid comprehens survey current initi identifi various strand work summaris main implic financi sector market congratul author exhaust report repres use refer whoever interest understand ongo develop regulatori supervisori field cours reader may necessarili agre conclus report particular report identifi major risk overregul instead stress virtu industri selfregul beg disagre view main risk right much rather littl serious risk gradual improv condit financi market bank industri may diminish sens urgenc necess implement reform identifi essenti prevent occurr similar crise futur albert hirschman american economist note mani debat preced social polit reform histor magnitud propos chang typic met three argument would produc pervers effect would ineffectu would jeopardis previous achiev afraid increas hear argument context debat financi reform crisi began summer develop time one disrupt cost crise economi societi world experienc mani decad therefor public author financi market particip collect respons whatev need address weak regulatori supervisori framework order provid sounder foundat financi system let stress area substanti work achiev design implement reform mention earlier substant progress made regulatori supervisori reform respons financi crisi remark amount technic work undertaken demand timefram relev initi coordin global european union frontrunn number key area three area much progress made credit rate agenc hedg fund compens practic regard credit rate agenc new eu regul subject agenc mandatori registr oversight order increas transpar reduc conflict interest rate process alreadi enter forc decemb hedg fund european commiss propos direct altern invest fund manag propos current debat provid altern invest fund manag subject authoris harmonis regulatori standard includ minimum capit well disclosur requir compens practic european commiss among first incorpor direct propos principl develop financi stabil board fsb sound compens practic project implement date end context eu lead intern agenda develop guidanc align compens practic longterm valu creation discourag excess risktak shortterm recal g leader pittsburgh septemb endors fsb implement standard aim defer bonus payment disallow guarante bonus introduc clawback claus addit agreement reach global comprehens set measur strengthen prudenti framework respons crisi eu commiss propos amend capit requir direct juli includ intern agre stricter requir trade book resecuritis moreov recent issu propos basel committe aim improv qualiti consist transpar capit credit institut well develop framework liquid risk consequ qualiti capit especi call tier capit utmost import lossabsorpt go concern crisi situat signific improv risk coverag capit requir strengthen counterparti risk relat deriv repo secur financ activ incent increas move otc deriv exposur central counterparti exchang leverag ratio introduc supplementari measur basel ii risk control framework curb excess balanc sheet growth safeguard model risk measur error capit buffer forwardlook provis introduc mitig inher procycl natur financi activ final global minimum liquid risk standard intern activ bank put place requir bank hold suffici highqual liquid asset withstand financi stress propos measur support group central bank governor head supervis request committe deliv fulli calibr finalis packag reform end commiss envisag time incorpor aforement upcom regulatori chang eu framework final intern cooper strong reinforc supervisori colleg larg complex financi group establish eu level set function colleg provid eu regulatori framework well advanc look ahead legisl propos fulli reflect ongo work intern eu level aim enhanc resili financi system protect consum investor impact excess risk take irrespons market practic main prioriti includ finalis reform prudenti framework address risk pose system import institut set framework macroprudenti supervis first strengthen prudenti framework current develop need proper time finalis agre measur implement address mani shortcom highlight financi crisi increas abil financi institut withstand shock thus resili financi system context let highlight import thorough impact assess carri cours year final calibr framework made exact time implement equal care consid econom financi recoveri endang context adequ transit grandfath arrang ensur second legisl reform also need address moral hazard stem system import financi institut resili financi system cannot taken grant author alway come rescu focus ongo work fsb regard threefold seek ensur financi institut whatev size interconnected caus undu distress function financi system economi whole mismanag drive bankruptci possibl tool includ introduc capit liquid surcharg constrain size rang activ reduc extern system import institut societi core financi infrastructur market need strengthen exampl via promot central counterparti clear revis supervisori standard financi market infrastructur also need review resolut regim bankruptci law ensur order windingdown system crossbord financi institut respect european commiss alreadi launch public consult measur new eu framework crisi manag bank sector polici option regard earli intervent bank resolut harmonis insolv procedur consid addit relev enhanc framework coordin among relev author financi stabil case crisi third final area relat macroprudenti supervis one key lesson stem financi crisi relat import understand assess degre interconnected market particip particular crisi demonstr natur magnitud system risk financi sector relat potenti illiquid insolv larg bank major regul financi institut also depend close intertwin financi institut market infrastructur financi stabil framework need abl identifi assess system risk correspond degre interconnected mention context macroprudenti oversight would focus factor risk affect stabil financi system whole therefor would complement microprudenti supervis look stabil individu financi institut macroprudenti oversight key task european system risk board esrb built propos high level group chair jacqu de larosièr european commiss legisl propos establish function esrb receiv support ecofin eu council european parliament current consid propos turn let also mention ecbeurosystem express stanc opinion adopt octob welcom broad agreement reach ecofin draft legal text regard establish esrb involv ecb support esrb state opinion ecb decid stand readi provid analyt statist administr logist support esrb includ secretariat esrb activ esrb valu ad esrb expect activ monitor various sourc risk financi stabil eu across countri across financi sector also take account global develop result monitor esrb identifi risk analys indepth could impact financi system stresstest methodolog could assist risk prioritis exercis valuead provid esrb link particular macroeconom condit structur develop key vulner financi institut permit identifi systemwid risk benefit regulatori supervisori polici monitor assess collect inform sourc risk conduct esrb level entir eu essenc given advanc financi integr intern market addit risk europ stem global sourc also need consid also coordin imf fsb financi stabil monitor eu whole provid signific analyt inform challeng larg part effect esrb reli qualiti solid analysi inform under financi stabil assess import setup effici arrang esrb new european supervisori author mutual cooper exchang inform foreseen commiss legisl propos would allow avoid multipl report financi institut order support new european macroprudenti function decid ecofin ecb provid analyt statist administr logist support also draw technic advic nation central bank supervisor member state accord optimis present capabl infrastructur area financi stabil monitor macroeconom analysi collect statist inform benefit esrb aim reap maximum synergi term expertis resourc infrastructur exist central bank activ eu aim preparatori work alreadi way let conclud say although much achiev improv european regulatori supervisori framework lot still remain done time complac still need make progress creat supervisori regulatori framework micro macroprudenti strong competit financi system enjoy sustain growth europ play lead role develop thank attent grate katri mikkonen valuabl input fátima pire fabio recin panagioti strouza use comment fundación de estudio financiero observatorio sobr la reforma de los mercado financiero europeo papel de la fundación n albert o hirschman rethor reaction pervers futil jeopardi cambridg ma harvard univers press reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en