Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The euro area's economic outlook,23-11-2010,European Central Bank,ECB,1776,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,It is a pleasure to attend this year’s Bloomberg Businessweek European Leadership Forum. Bloomberg’s and Europe’s economy have at least one thing in common. Coincidently, Bloomberg was founded in 1981 and so was the ECU, the European currency unit, one of the forefathers of our common currency, the euro. So let me take the opportunity, today, to speak about the state of the euro area economy. When assessing the euro area economic outlook, three criteria are of particular relevance in the current juncture. First, how much does the euro area banking sector still rely on central bank liquidity support measures? And second, can we be confident that private sector domestic demand can contribute to a sustained economic recovery? And third, what are the implications for price stability against this background?In what I will present to you I will argue that there are some good news when assessing these two questions. First, money market activity in the euro area improved which has allowed the ECB to withdraw some of the liquidity support. Second, household incomes and non-financial corporations’ balance sheets are improving supporting a positive outlook on euro area growth, also against the background of further consolidation efforts of euro area governments. And third, we expect price stability to be maintained over the medium term, thereby supporting the purchasing power of euro area households, also as inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in line with our aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.So let me assess the euro area financial and economic outlook in a bit more detail.The size of refinancing operations has decreased considerably since 30 June 2010, from €881 billion on that date to €510 billion in mid-November. The phasing-out of non-standard measures continued in the third quarter of 2010, and is still continuing in the fourth quarter, as all maturing one-year and six-month longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs) are not being renewed. Conditions in the euro area money markets are improving. The volumes in the interbank money market (EONIA) have virtually doubled since summer, and are now back to the levels prevailing before August 2007. The overall reduction in central bank liquidity has brought the interbank (EONIA) rate closer to the policy rate, which is an important step towards going back to our pre-crisis framework.Economic activity in the euro area is recovering. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, GDP grew by 0.4%, quarter on quarter, in the third quarter of 2010, after increasing by 1.0% in the second quarter.While no breakdown is available for the third quarter of 2010, all components contributed positively to quarterly GDP growth in the second quarter. In particular, domestic demand contributed quite strongly for the first time since the crisis, namely by 0.5 percentage point.Looking beyond the third quarter, survey indicators, such as the Purchasing Managers’ index (PMI) and European Commission business surveys for the manufacturing and the services sectors, point to ongoing growth in October.Consumer confidence increased in October and stood above its long-term average, pointing to a gradual recovery in euro area consumption.The sentiment in the survey data finds its support in a number of encouraging developments, both in the household and in the non-financial corporations sector. On the household side, labour markets are stabilising, with employment levels remaining stable in the first and the second quarters of 2010, while hours worked increased by 0.2%, quarter on quarter, in both these quarters. The effect of the crisis on hours worked was far stronger than that on the number of persons employed. Therefore, the upturn has also been stronger in terms of the hours worked.Moreover, the unemployment rate has stabilised in the last few months and stood at 10.0% in the third quarter of 2010.Overall, the stabilisation in the labour markets is creating good prospects for household income and, thereby, also for private consumption. Indeed, the breakdown of households’ income shows that the share of compensation of employees has increased recently, while the contribution of net social benefits has declined.As to non-financial corporations, we can observe an increasing improvement in their conditions.Industrial production (excluding construction) and new orders (excluding ships, railway and aerospace equipment) are on a rising trend after the strong decline observed during the crisis.Euro area financing conditions are showing signs of a gradual improvement. Short term and long term bank lending rates are currently at very low levels by historical standards supporting a turnaround in the demand for credit.The annual growth of MFI loans to non-financial corporations became less negative in September, confirming that the turnaround in loan dynamics is ongoing. The annual growth of loans to non-financial corporations is actually expected to turn positive in the last quarter of 2010.The crisis has brought to the fore a number challenges for the euro area economy and our common currency, the euro. Some of these challenges are new ones, but some are existing ones that were amplified by the crisis developments. It is clear that we cannot be complacent against the background of the positive sentiment on the euro area economic outlook. We need to ambitiously and urgently address the challenges that we are facing to ensure a continued and sustainable outlook for euro area growth and price stability. For this reason we need bold reforms in Europe’s economic governance, particularly with regard to fiscal and macroeconomic policy surveillance.The crisis has caused public finances to deteriorate significantly, not only in the euro area, but throughout the advanced world. This can be seen, first and foremost, from the rapid rise in government deficits and debt ratios over a short period of time. The budget gaps in the United Kingdom and the United States have actually reached double-digit figures, with Japan coming close as well. As regards the euro area, according to the Spring 2010 projections by the European Commission, the government deficit could rise to 6.6% of GDP this year, before moderating to 6.1% in 2011. These budgetary developments reflect three main factors. The first, is the operation of automatic fiscal stabilisers, i.e. the reaction to the recession built into the budgets, given the existing social security and tax systems. Second, the origins of the fiscal expansion are to be found in the stimulus packages that were a coordinated response to the European Economic Recovery Plan of December 2008 and bank recapitalisation. Their cumulative impact was roughly 2.3% of GDP in 2009-10. Third, a number of other factors show up in an expansionary fiscal stance, namely other discretionary measures, unexpected revenue shortfalls (e.g. losses of income linked to the decline in asset prices) and ongoing spending trends (e.g. in public wages), even as the trend of nominal GDP growth fell markedly.However, against the background of rapidly deteriorating fiscal positions, many euro area countries have started to implement their consolidation plans, which is reflected in the projected decrease in fiscal deficits for the coming year by the European Commission. In the years prior to the crisis, the development of competitiveness diverged significantly across euro area countries. Relative price adjustments have thus far been relatively moderate within the euro area, if there have been any at all. In fact, unit labour costs in the period 2008-09 have generally increased in deficit countries relative to those in the euro area as a whole. Looking forward, such cost adjustment in the period 2010-11 is currently expected to be relatively limited. According to European Commission forecasts, only Ireland is expected to experience a significant improvement in its labour costs relative to those in the euro area. While the growth of labour costs is also expected to decline in all other deficit countries, it will in many cases remain close to, or even above, the corresponding rate for the euro area as a whole.Therefore including competitiveness as an indicator for surveillance at the European level is key and already foreseen in the new EU economic governance framework. European leaders recognize the need of a considerable strengthening of the economic model. At their meeting on 28 and 29 October 2010, the EU Heads of State and Government agreed on the reform of the European Union’s economic governance. The proposals put forward by President van Rompuy represent a strengthening of the existing framework for fiscal and macroeconomic surveillance in the European Union. However, the Governing Council feels that they do not go far enough to be the quantum leap forward in the economic governance of Monetary Union that it has been calling for. [1]On the fiscal surveillance, we need an effective surveillance mechanism so that corrective policy action is taken in good time. And we need ambitious targets for the reduction of public debt towards the 60% of GDP ceiling. On the broader surveillance of macroeconomic policies in the euro area, we need a new system of mutual surveillance in the euro area, concentrating firmly on euro area countries experiencing sustained losses of competitiveness and large current account deficits as these countries face the greatest sustainability challenges. It should be determined by transparent and effective trigger mechanisms and specify clearly the sanctions in case of breach. And we need full transparency. The assessments of macroeconomic imbalances and recommendations for corrective action should be given broad publicity at all stages of the surveillance process. And finally, the financial crisis has taught us that economic growth can be severely impacted by financial market disruptions. For this reason, European leaders agreed on a new financial supervisory architecture for the EU aiming to prevent financial disruptions of the kind that we have been experiencing in the future. This new financial supervisory architecture, which will become operational as of 1 January 2011, includes the three new European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) for banking, insurance and securities markets to enhance micro-prudential supervision and the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) as the new macro-prudential supervisory body in the EU. The ECB will provide the secretariat to the ESRB. The assignment to the ECB of specific tasks concerning the functioning of the ESRB is welcome, but does not constitute a change in the mandate or an additional objective for monetary policy. Rather, these tasks should contribute to financial stability, while being fully in line with the ECB’s primary objective of maintaining price stability. There are clear lines of institutional separation between the ECB and the ESRB. In particular, both institutions are independent and have separate, clearly defined mandates, namely the maintenance of price stability in the case of the ECB and the mitigation of systemic risk in that of the ESRB.[1]See the ECB proposals on “Reforming economic governance in the euro area”, which President Trichet submitted to the van Rompuy Task Force on behalf of the Governing Council on 15 June 2010. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen pleasur attend year bloomberg businessweek european leadership forum bloomberg europ economi least one thing common coincid bloomberg found ecu european currenc unit one forefath common currenc euro let take opportun today speak state euro area economi assess euro area econom outlook three criteria particular relev current junctur first much euro area bank sector still reli central bank liquid support measur second confid privat sector domest demand contribut sustain econom recoveri third implic price stabil background present argu good news assess two question first money market activ euro area improv allow ecb withdraw liquid support second household incom nonfinanci corpor balanc sheet improv support posit outlook euro area growth also background consolid effort euro area govern third expect price stabil maintain medium term therebi support purchas power euro area household also inflat expect remain firm anchor line aim keep inflat rate close medium term let assess euro area financi econom outlook bit detail size refinanc oper decreas consider sinc june billion date billion midnovemb phasingout nonstandard measur continu third quarter still continu fourth quarter matur oneyear sixmonth longerterm refinanc oper ltros renew condit euro area money market improv volum interbank money market eonia virtual doubl sinc summer back level prevail august overal reduct central bank liquid brought interbank eonia rate closer polici rate import step toward go back precrisi framework econom activ euro area recov accord eurostat flash estim gdp grew quarter quarter third quarter increas second quarter breakdown avail third quarter compon contribut posit quarter gdp growth second quarter particular domest demand contribut quit strong first time sinc crisi name percentag point look beyond third quarter survey indic purchas manag index pmi european commiss busi survey manufactur servic sector point ongo growth octob consum confid increas octob stood longterm averag point gradual recoveri euro area consumpt sentiment survey data find support number encourag develop household nonfinanci corpor sector household side labour market stabilis employ level remain stabl first second quarter hour work increas quarter quarter quarter effect crisi hour work far stronger number person employ therefor upturn also stronger term hour work moreov unemploy rate stabilis last month stood third quarter overal stabilis labour market creat good prospect household incom therebi also privat consumpt inde breakdown household incom show share compens employe increas recent contribut net social benefit declin nonfinanci corpor observ increas improv condit industri product exclud construct new order exclud ship railway aerospac equip rise trend strong declin observ crisi euro area financ condit show sign gradual improv short term long term bank lend rate current low level histor standard support turnaround demand credit annual growth mfi loan nonfinanci corpor becam less negat septemb confirm turnaround loan dynam ongo annual growth loan nonfinanci corpor actual expect turn posit last quarter crisi brought fore number challeng euro area economi common currenc euro challeng new one exist one amplifi crisi develop clear cannot complac background posit sentiment euro area econom outlook need ambiti urgent address challeng face ensur continu sustain outlook euro area growth price stabil reason need bold reform europ econom govern particular regard fiscal macroeconom polici surveil crisi caus public financ deterior signific euro area throughout advanc world seen first foremost rapid rise govern deficit debt ratio short period time budget gap unit kingdom unit state actual reach doubledigit figur japan come close well regard euro area accord spring project european commiss govern deficit could rise gdp year moder budgetari develop reflect three main factor first oper automat fiscal stabilis e reaction recess built budget given exist social secur tax system second origin fiscal expans found stimulus packag coordin respons european econom recoveri plan decemb bank recapitalis cumul impact rough gdp third number factor show expansionari fiscal stanc name discretionari measur unexpect revenu shortfal e g loss incom link declin asset price ongo spend trend e g public wage even trend nomin gdp growth fell mark howev background rapid deterior fiscal posit mani euro area countri start implement consolid plan reflect project decreas fiscal deficit come year european commiss year prior crisi develop competit diverg signific across euro area countri relat price adjust thus far relat moder within euro area fact unit labour cost period general increas deficit countri relat euro area whole look forward cost adjust period current expect relat limit accord european commiss forecast ireland expect experi signific improv labour cost relat euro area growth labour cost also expect declin deficit countri mani case remain close even correspond rate euro area whole therefor includ competit indic surveil european level key alreadi foreseen new eu econom govern framework european leader recogn need consider strengthen econom model meet octob eu head state govern agre reform european union econom govern propos put forward presid van rompuy repres strengthen exist framework fiscal macroeconom surveil european union howev govern council feel go far enough quantum leap forward econom govern monetari union call fiscal surveil need effect surveil mechan correct polici action taken good time need ambiti target reduct public debt toward gdp ceil broader surveil macroeconom polici euro area need new system mutual surveil euro area concentr firm euro area countri experienc sustain loss competit larg current account deficit countri face greatest sustain challeng determin transpar effect trigger mechan specifi clear sanction case breach need full transpar assess macroeconom imbal recommend correct action given broad public stage surveil process final financi crisi taught us econom growth sever impact financi market disrupt reason european leader agre new financi supervisori architectur eu aim prevent financi disrupt kind experienc futur new financi supervisori architectur becom oper januari includ three new european supervisori author esa bank insur secur market enhanc microprudenti supervis european system risk board esrb new macroprudenti supervisori bodi eu ecb provid secretariat esrb assign ecb specif task concern function esrb welcom constitut chang mandat addit object monetari polici rather task contribut financi stabil fulli line ecb primari object maintain price stabil clear line institut separ ecb esrb particular institut independ separ clear defin mandat name mainten price stabil case ecb mitig system risk esrb see ecb propos reform econom govern euro area presid trichet submit van rompuy task forc behalf govern council june reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en