Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: What is the role of central banks for banking supervision?,08-09-2008,European Central Bank,ECB,544,"<p>The ECB has already expressed its position on the possible role of central bank in financial supervision in 2001. This was triggered in the context in which some countries were in the process of transferring the supervisory function from the central bank to independent authorities. The main position at that time, which remains valid today, is that there is no optimal arrangement for the organisation of supervision at the national level. All organisational models – sectoral supervision, supervision by objectives, supervision in a single authority – can in principle work well or fail depending on circumstances. However, regardless of the model, it is important that there exists a very close and smooth interplay between the central banking and the supervisory function. Does the experience of the turmoil bring new elements in this domain? This is certainly the case. In general the turmoil has clearly confirmed the importance of a strong interaction between central banks and banking supervisors as also confirmed by the specific recommendation of the Financial Stability Forum in this field. As a new element the turmoil has somewhat contributed to specifying the relevant areas in which this interplay should be reinforced.First, in the area of monitoring and assessing risks to financial stability, central banks can benefit from extended access to supervisory information and intelligence to better understand risks and vulnerabilities for the financial system as a whole. At the same, there is clearly the issue, of how to translate the outcome of the financial stability assessment into supervisory action. In principle one cannot but agree that there should be a way through which, if the central bank identifies serious risks to financial stability, the competent supervisor should be able to act. Therefore, communication needs to go both ways: from the central bank to supervisors and vice versa within the respective legal framework.Second, in the area of liquidity, there is clearly room for a closer interplay between the two authorities. Central banks would benefit from enhanced access to supervisory information and intelligence for its role of maintaining stable money markets. To that end for instance access to information on banks’ liquidity contingency planning funds would be useful. At the same time, supervisors would benefit from information available at central banks stemming from their role in the money markets.Third, in the area of crisis management and resolution, depending on the nature and feature of the crisis, there is a need for close interaction between the two authorities. Provision of Emergency Liquidity Assistance is a clear point in case where central banks need supervisory information for decision-making. In this field, I believe that an important step forward is represented by the recent MoU on financial stability arrangement signed by the EU central banks, supervisors and ministries of finance in June 2008. Finally, referring more to the supervisory domain but still linked to the central bank interest, the turmoil has evidenced the need for strengthening the macro-prudential dimension of regulation and supervision. This means the regulatory and supervisory requirements should be able to ensure adequate capital and liquidity buffers throughout the economic cycle. In this regard, the actual impact of the new capital adequacy regime under of Basel II will have to be monitored very closely.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ecb alreadi express posit possibl role central bank financi supervis trigger context countri process transfer supervisori function central bank independ author main posit time remain valid today optim arrang organis supervis nation level organis model sector supervis supervis object supervis singl author principl work well fail depend circumst howev regardless model import exist close smooth interplay central bank supervisori function experi turmoil bring new element domain certain case general turmoil clear confirm import strong interact central bank bank supervisor also confirm specif recommend financi stabil forum field new element turmoil somewhat contribut specifi relev area interplay reinforc first area monitor assess risk financi stabil central bank benefit extend access supervisori inform intellig better understand risk vulner financi system whole clear issu translat outcom financi stabil assess supervisori action principl one cannot agre way central bank identifi serious risk financi stabil compet supervisor abl act therefor communic need go way central bank supervisor vice versa within respect legal framework second area liquid clear room closer interplay two author central bank would benefit enhanc access supervisori inform intellig role maintain stabl money market end instanc access inform bank liquid conting plan fund would use time supervisor would benefit inform avail central bank stem role money market third area crisi manag resolut depend natur featur crisi need close interact two author provis emerg liquid assist clear point case central bank need supervisori inform decisionmak field believ import step forward repres recent mou financi stabil arrang sign eu central bank supervisor ministri financ june final refer supervisori domain still link central bank interest turmoil evidenc need strengthen macroprudenti dimens regul supervis mean regulatori supervisori requir abl ensur adequ capit liquid buffer throughout econom cycl regard actual impact new capit adequaci regim basel ii monitor close reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en