Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Speech at the International Bankers’ Club,16-06-2008,European Central Bank,ECB,2157,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Carlo Thill and the Board of Directors of the International Bankers’ Club Luxembourg for having invited me to speak on this occasion today. I am very glad to be here and and to share my views with such distinguished audience of the International Bankers’ Club Luxembourg, who has always shown a strong interest in European Union matters. In my speech today I will focus on the need for European financial integration and harmonisation, and on the ECB’s endeavours to support these objectives, in particular through two important central banking services: TARGET2 and TARGET2-Securities. Let me say that it is always a pleasure to be in Luxembourg, a country whose historic and strategic importance dates back to its founding as a Roman era fortress site, a country that represents the junction between Roman Europe and Germanic Europe, uniting customs drawn from each of these rather distinct traditions. Luxembourg has proved to be a pioneer. It was a founding member of the European Union, the United Nations, and participated in the EMU from its first day in 1999. The evolution of the city as a significant financial centre has strengthened its character as an international metropolis. As Jean Monnet said: ""the small city has become a cross-road of Europe"". I see Luxembourg as a microcosm of the Europe of tomorrow and I sincerely hope that its success, with the highest GDP per capita in the world, will inspire other parts of Europe.In that respect, my topic of creating a single European financial market is very relevant since it will help to increase economic growth and prosperity in every member state. It will increase consumer choice, open a multitude of new investment opportunities, strengthen the EU banking sector and make Europe a centre for financial innovation. I am sure you share this ambition - but the question – of course – arises how we can make it happen? Well, as the proverb says: “where there’s a will there's a way”. That means, we all have to be determined to undergo the necessary changes that will lead to an integrated and harmonized European financial market. That seems the only “way” to go!Let me be clear. The single European financial market requires our support if it does not emerge by itself. Integration and harmonization are intended to promote economic well-being as increasingly integrated financial markets that ignore national boundaries broaden the geographic domain in which financial institutions and their customers make decisions. Competition now has an inescapable global dimension, even for many small businesses. Ladies and gentlemen, I do not have to explain to you neither the benefits of intense competition, nor the risks to those who do not adapt. We in the Eurosystem want to support the private sector’s adaptation and success by promoting integration and harmonization of the financial system. Both of these enable the realisation of economies scales; they foster competition and the expansion of markets, and facilitate a more efficient allocation of better-priced capital. As you may recall, the European financial integration objective was addressed in detail in Lisbon in March 2000, where EU leaders adopted a ten-year programme (the Lisbon Agenda). The Financial Services Action Plan consists of a set of 42 measures, designed to strengthen the European financial industry by encouraging free market access, competition and the creation of more efficient markets. Some of these measures took the shape of EU law, either as a Regulation or as a Directive, such as the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MiFID) and the Collateral Directive. These have undoubtedly liberated competitive forces, with positive results for Europe.Other initiatives were allocated to the users of markets. In particular, providers of securities market infrastructure have adopted, with encouragement from Commissioner Mr McCreevey, the Code of Conduct, in which they commit to meet certain standards in the areas of price transparency, open access and interoperability, and service unbundling. While there has been some progress, the jury is still out on whether providers will co-operate enough to achieve the high levels of interoperability required for an integrated infrastructure. As Alexander Schaub from the European Commission said several years ago in Dublin, “financial integration is not simply a question of turning up and declaring the single market open for business” [1]. We need to accelerate the harmonization, or removal, of issues which are barriers to cross-border business – such as market practices, discriminatory provisions and domestic protectionist barriers – so that what is now cross-border business in Europe becomes truly domestic. Indeed, we have already helped, in various ways, in the removal of the barriers to efficient and competitive markets identified by the Giovannini Group, for example by providing advice to the European Commission on regulatory aspects that need to be addressed.Let me now turn to TARGET2, the new RTGS system for the settlement in real time of predominantly high-value euro payments in central bank money as a perfect example of the ECB’s contribution to more integrated and harmonized financial markets.TARGET2 provides a single integrated platform to replace 20 decentralized technical TARGET platforms. It has been working very well from its start and provides the core, integrated and borderless infrastructure that Europe needs. To give you a flavour of the scale of its service, in the first week after completing final migration TARGET2 processed 1.72 million payments amounting to a total of 16.5 trillion euro. TARGET2 is a practical example of a successful delivery by the Eurosystem and banks, working together, of integrated infrastructure which embodies the process of harmonization. I also wish to congratulate the Banque Centrale du Luxembourg and the Luxembourguise banking community on this occasion for their remarkable contribution and excellent preparatory work, and for helping to pioneer the migration to the new system in November last year. I would like to turn now to another large integration project – namely TARGET2 for Securities, or T2S, as it is commonly known. In contrast with the current fragmented scenario, T2S will deliver a single technical platform to provide very secure and real time delivery versus payment for all classes of European securities against central bank money, replacing dozens of local platforms. This will create a single pool of securities, available to market users and service providers through their chosen CSD. With T2S, the concept of cross-border settlement in Europe will disappear. T2S will integrate the security settlement infrastructure as well as embody harmonization in important areas such as common interfaces, common set of rules for intra-day settlement finality, a common daily timetable, and common messages. These features are an immediate contribution to the elimination of 6 of the 15 so-called Giovannini barriers. This will – of course – create substantial gains for the financial sector, but also for the society as a whole, through a reduction in costs and a better allocation of resources. There is no doubt that the economic gains will be substantial. T2S will contribute to increasing competition, more transparent pricing facilitating overall the trading activity. Since T2S will be operated by a public entity, the Eurosystem, T2S can be relied on to operate in a fair way and on a not for profit basis.Furthermore, more from a central banker’s perspective, more effective post trading structures - as achieved by T2S - will contribute to global resilience of financial markets and hence constitutes an important element to safeguard financial stability. Moreover, T2S will contribute to lower cost of capital, hence contributing to the general growth in financial markets and overall economic growth. Let me add that post trading costs in the US are at much lower levels than in Europe. Therefore, we need to make Europe more competitive in the global financial market, and T2S is an important contribution in this regard. Thanks to efforts made by hundreds of experts from over 80 European institutions and from the Eurosystem over the last year, the Governing Council of the ECB has been able in the last few weeks to invite the European CSDs to express their support for T2S. We distributed to the European CSDs detailed user requirements, an economic impact analysis, a description of governance for the next project phase, and a presentation on harmonization efforts in the context of T2S, which are all the outcome of a transparent and constructive consultation process, cooperating with CSDs and market users. Let me just point to a few elements of the economic impact study which you can also find on our website. The analysis concludes that the costs of settlement can reduced substantially from 73 cents a CSD charges on average today to 32 cents per transaction under T2S. These costs can be even further reduced if more CSDs decide to join the T2S project. These numbers represent only the narrow business case and do not capture – of course – the full dynamic impact of T2S arising from enhanced competition in a single market for security settlement. Let me stress that while one can be skeptical about the precise numbers I just mentioned, but we should definitely not be skeptical about the overall benefits of a more competitive and more integrated European financial market. T2S has been developed in a pure harmonization spirit which excludes – of course - specific functionalities supporting local practices. This does not mean that T2S prevents CSDs from supporting local practices; it will however give those concerned – including legislators and regulators – an opportunity to consider whether their preservation is in the long term interests of the relevant economy. We have worked with the T2S stakeholders to identify topics that can be further harmonized in the future. These topics fall into three categories: further harmonization within the scope of T2S, harmonization to be implemented by the private sector or harmonization that they may require action by the public authorities. It is clear that the Eurosystem will promote and implement all the issues that can be directly harmonized within T2S. As regards the private sector, we expect that the market transformation induced by T2S will offer market participants to develop and implement their own harmonization initiatives, for example in the field of corporate actions. The Eurosystem welcomes very much all such efforts towards harmonization and stands ready to give all the support needed.As regards harmonization to be carried out by the public authorities, this would fall under the responsibility of the European Commission bodies and working groups, such as CESAME, the Legal Certainty Group (LCG) and the Fiscal Compliance Experts Group FISCO. Working with the industry leaders and experts on the T2S Advisory Group, we, the ECB and the Eurosystem will advise and cooperate with such bodies, with a firm eye on the need for progress. To focus our own effort, we intend to present a progress report on the achieved degree of harmonization to the ECB’s Governing Council by early 2009.Overall, integration and harmonization have become a core objective of the European Union; the European bodies are determined to support the European financial industry to increase competitiveness by giving it access to an efficient, state of the art financial infrastructure supporting a true single market. The Eurosystem is ready to firmly commit to deliver T2S as a state-of-the-art settlement system to the market via the CSDs by 2013 at the latest. It is also clear, that the Eurosystem cannot do it alone. As substantial financial investments will need to be made for building T2S, so we need the support and the commitment of the CSDs. We have asked all European CSDs to express – by 4 July – their support for the T2S project. We are sure that CSDs will consult their clients and other stakeholders, many of whom have already expressed strong support, often also in public. The Governing Council will take into account this feedback when it meets on 17th July to decide if the Eurosystem will further support the T2S project. As President Trichet has said on many occasions “it is not, in any respect, time for complacency”. While we can be pleased to have got so far so fast, we need to keep up a fast pace. We are ready to start the next phase of the project immediately after the – hopefully - positive decision of the Governing Council in order to meet the next milestone: defining the next level of the detail in the form of the general functional specification. This will make it possible for T2S to be live no later than 2013. Ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Eurosystem, let me conclude by thanking the distinguished representatives of the banking sector for their contribution to the successful completion of the work done so far, and by asking for your continued support and co-operation.Thank you very much.[1] Alexander Schaub- European Commission: “Removing regulatory barriers to international finance: Pointers from the EU single market”. Dublin, 30th MarchReproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen first would like thank mr carlo thill board director intern banker club luxembourg invit speak occas today glad share view distinguish audienc intern banker club luxembourg alway shown strong interest european union matter speech today focus need european financi integr harmonis ecb endeavour support object particular two import central bank servic target target secur let say alway pleasur luxembourg countri whose histor strateg import date back found roman era fortress site countri repres junction roman europ german europ unit custom drawn rather distinct tradit luxembourg prove pioneer found member european union unit nation particip emu first day evolut citi signific financi centr strengthen charact intern metropoli jean monnet said small citi becom crossroad europ see luxembourg microcosm europ tomorrow sincer hope success highest gdp per capita world inspir part europ respect topic creat singl european financi market relev sinc help increas econom growth prosper everi member state increas consum choic open multitud new invest opportun strengthen eu bank sector make europ centr financi innov sure share ambit question cours aris make happen well proverb say way mean determin undergo necessari chang lead integr harmon european financi market seem way go let clear singl european financi market requir support emerg integr harmon intend promot econom wellb increas integr financi market ignor nation boundari broaden geograph domain financi institut custom make decis competit inescap global dimens even mani small busi ladi gentlemen explain neither benefit intens competit risk adapt eurosystem want support privat sector adapt success promot integr harmon financi system enabl realis economi scale foster competit expans market facilit effici alloc betterpr capit may recal european financi integr object address detail lisbon march eu leader adopt tenyear programm lisbon agenda financi servic action plan consist set measur design strengthen european financi industri encourag free market access competit creation effici market measur took shape eu law either regul direct market financi instrument direct mifid collater direct undoubt liber competit forc posit result europ initi alloc user market particular provid secur market infrastructur adopt encourag commission mr mccreevey code conduct commit meet certain standard area price transpar open access interoper servic unbundl progress juri still whether provid cooper enough achiev high level interoper requir integr infrastructur alexand schaub european commiss said sever year ago dublin financi integr simpli question turn declar singl market open busi need acceler harmon remov issu barrier crossbord busi market practic discriminatori provis domest protectionist barrier crossbord busi europ becom truli domest inde alreadi help various way remov barrier effici competit market identifi giovannini group exampl provid advic european commiss regulatori aspect need address let turn target new rtgs system settlement real time predomin highvalu euro payment central bank money perfect exampl ecb contribut integr harmon financi market target provid singl integr platform replac decentr technic target platform work well start provid core integr borderless infrastructur europ need give flavour scale servic first week complet final migrat target process million payment amount total trillion euro target practic exampl success deliveri eurosystem bank work togeth integr infrastructur embodi process harmon also wish congratul banqu central du luxembourg luxembourguis bank communiti occas remark contribut excel preparatori work help pioneer migrat new system novemb last year would like turn anoth larg integr project name target secur common known contrast current fragment scenario deliv singl technic platform provid secur real time deliveri versus payment class european secur central bank money replac dozen local platform creat singl pool secur avail market user servic provid chosen csd concept crossbord settlement europ disappear integr secur settlement infrastructur well embodi harmon import area common interfac common set rule intraday settlement final common daili timet common messag featur immedi contribut elimin socal giovannini barrier cours creat substanti gain financi sector also societi whole reduct cost better alloc resourc doubt econom gain substanti contribut increas competit transpar price facilit overal trade activ sinc oper public entiti eurosystem reli oper fair way profit basi furthermor central banker perspect effect post trade structur achiev contribut global resili financi market henc constitut import element safeguard financi stabil moreov contribut lower cost capit henc contribut general growth financi market overal econom growth let add post trade cost us much lower level europ therefor need make europ competit global financi market import contribut regard thank effort made hundr expert european institut eurosystem last year govern council ecb abl last week invit european csds express support distribut european csds detail user requir econom impact analysi descript govern next project phase present harmon effort context outcom transpar construct consult process cooper csds market user let point element econom impact studi also find websit analysi conclud cost settlement reduc substanti cent csd charg averag today cent per transact cost even reduc csds decid join project number repres narrow busi case captur cours full dynam impact aris enhanc competit singl market secur settlement let stress one skeptic precis number mention definit skeptic overal benefit competit integr european financi market develop pure harmon spirit exclud cours specif function support local practic mean prevent csds support local practic howev give concern includ legisl regul opportun consid whether preserv long term interest relev economi work stakehold identifi topic harmon futur topic fall three categori harmon within scope harmon implement privat sector harmon may requir action public author clear eurosystem promot implement issu direct harmon within regard privat sector expect market transform induc offer market particip develop implement harmon initi exampl field corpor action eurosystem welcom much effort toward harmon stand readi give support need regard harmon carri public author would fall respons european commiss bodi work group cesam legal certainti group lcg fiscal complianc expert group fisco work industri leader expert advisori group ecb eurosystem advis cooper bodi firm eye need progress focus effort intend present progress report achiev degre harmon ecb govern council earli overal integr harmon becom core object european union european bodi determin support european financi industri increas competit give access effici state art financi infrastructur support true singl market eurosystem readi firm commit deliv stateoftheart settlement system market via csds latest also clear eurosystem cannot alon substanti financi invest need made build need support commit csds ask european csds express juli support project sure csds consult client stakehold mani alreadi express strong support often also public govern council take account feedback meet th juli decid eurosystem support project presid trichet said mani occas respect time complac pleas got far fast need keep fast pace readi start next phase project immedi hope posit decis govern council order meet next mileston defin next level detail form general function specif make possibl live later ladi gentlemen behalf eurosystem let conclud thank distinguish repres bank sector contribut success complet work done far ask continu support cooper thank much alexand schaub european commiss remov regulatori barrier intern financ pointer eu singl market dublin th marchreproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en