Benoît Cœuré: On the optimal size of the financial sector,02-09-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,2725,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen [1],Thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to speak here today.The recent global financial crisis has made us rethink the contribution of the financial sector to the real economy. Today, I will talk about how our understanding of the finance and growth nexus has changed over the past years, and how policy-makers in Europe ‒ in particular, here at the European Central Bank (ECB) ‒ have used this knowledge.In the years prior to the financial crisis, the empirical literature on finance and growth accumulated a substantial body of evidence suggesting that financial sector deepening is a key component of the economic development process. This appeared to be true, both in respect of emerging markets and industrialised economies. [2] Encouraged by such evidence, policy-makers did not question the ability of the financial sector to innovate and channel funds to their most socially productive uses. In the words of the Federal Reserve’s then Chairman Alan Greenspan: “[…] our financial system, whose job it is to ensure the productive use of physical capital, has been such a crucial part of our overall economy, especially over the past two decades. It is the signals reflected in financial asset prices, interest rates, and risk spreads that have altered the structure of our output in recent decades towards a different view of what consumers judge as value.” [3] Yet, economies with large, dynamic, and complex financial sectors are not immune to severe macroeconomic contractions. In fact, the banking crises literature provided some evidence on a causal link between rapid credit growth and systemic banking distress long before the emergence of the global financial crisis [4]. Furthermore, the output costs of severe banking crises have been found to be of a large magnitude. [5] Are these two observations contradictory? Not necessarily ‒ both are related to well-understood economic mechanisms. On the one hand, mature financial industries ensure the efficient allocation of productive resources, supporting long-term growth. On the other hand, excessive leverage can throw the financial system into a crisis resulting in deep and abrupt economic downturns. [6] The crisis has made us understand that the size of the financial sector can exacerbate the trade-off between economic efficiency and financial stability. While finance per se is necessary for growth, an oversized financial industry can be detrimental to real economic activity. Of course, the question of what constitutes an “oversized” financial sector is a complex one, and the collection of papers on the programme of this conference makes great progress towards providing an answer.Recent changes to the global regulatory architecture, particularly regarding the banking union in Europe, are in part aimed at mitigating the negative effects that a large and complex modern financial industry can have. These changes should be implemented in a way that avoids eliminating the positive impact of financial services on growth and tackling financial complexity with overly complicated and excessive regulatory interventions. In addition, policy-makers should be increasingly aware of the importance of overcoming fragmentation in European capital markets and of achieving a single market for capital.As regards the link between finance and growth, for a long time, it was common to say that finance affects growth in a positive, monotonic way, as if more is always better. Recent empirical evidence, however, has qualified this conventional wisdom. The analysis has now been refined to show that, beyond a threshold size, the effect of finance on long-term economic growth can weaken and even become negative. [7] Why is the effect of finance on growth non-linear? Recent academic research puts forward at least five possible explanations. First, the financial sector has gradually extended its scope beyond the traditional activity of intermediation towards so-called “non-intermediation” financial activities, such as trading. The evidence strongly suggests that banking strategies which are heavily geared towards generating non-interest income are riskier. [8] This change in focus is naturally associated with a higher potential for systemic crisis. Moreover, as a result, it has become increasingly more difficult to come up with empirical measures of financial services that are consistent with what modern-day finance actually does. This is especially true for high-income economies whose financial sectors are particularly sophisticated. Second, the financial system can grow too large relative to the real economy because it can extract excessively high informational rents and pay excessively high wages. For example, while in the wake of World War II the financial sector accounted for less than 2.5% of total labour income, in 2006, this share was 8.3%. As a result, too much young talent can be reallocated towards the financial industry. [9] To put it more bluntly: the world before the crisis was one where there were too many bankers and too few engineers. This particular type of “brain drain” can harm the overall productivity of the real economy. It can be highly inefficient if the social returns to financial services are lower than their private returns, which is probably the case when the financial sector is very large to begin with. Third, an expansion in the financial sector can signal a misallocation of credit to less productive economic activities. Textbook models of financial intermediation usually assume the mobilisation of savings for entrepreneurial credit. However, much of the spike in financial intermediation before the crisis was associated with household credit, and mostly with mortgage credit. In fact, in a number of countries (e.g. Canada, Denmark and the Netherlands), loans to households accounted for more than 80% of overall bank lending. In most cases, an additional euro of mortgage lending contributes less to overall economic growth than an additional euro of credit to a young innovative company.Fourth, an oversized financial sector can reflect increased risk-taking. For example, it has been argued that increased bank competition can erode individual banks’ franchise values. This, in turn, can encourage banks to engage in imprudent behaviour. [10] Competitive behaviour can increase the resilience of the system, while a competitive market structure can weaken it. [11] A similar logic applies to an environment where liquidity is abundant. This can result from a very accommodative monetary policy (as outlined in the “risk-taking” view of monetary policy transmission [12]), from a leveraged financial system with high inside money creation [13], or from a combination of both. Such an environment exacerbates moral hazard problems in the banking sector, increasing banks’ appetite for risk. Meanwhile, increased risk-taking makes both individual banks and the banking sector as a whole more fragile, increasing the probability of a systemic meltdown and thereby harming long-term growth.Last but not least, there is a link between the size of the financial sector and its complexity. It is likely that the complexity and interconnectedness of financial institutions increases (presumably in a non-linear way) with the size of the overall financial system, making it more difficult for regulators to understand what is going on within its bounds. Policy-makers have allowed the financial system to balloon without availing themselves of the instruments to understand its complexity and monitor the propagations of shocks [14]. We cannot afford to be caught off guard again, simply guessing where the real problems may lie.Now that we have identified the problem, what is the solution? In the wake of the financial crisis, the global regulatory architecture has evolved to meet the challenge posed by the financial sector’s potential to generate economic distress. For one, we have proceeded towards a more integrated governance of the banking sector in Europe. The first components of a genuine banking union – the Single Supervisory Mechanism and the Single Resolution Mechanism – are already being implemented. By aiming to make the banking activities conducted in Europe safer, the banking union implicitly touches on some of the aspects of “oversized finance” in general, and “overbanking” in particular [15]. We need to be mindful of the fact that the macro problem (the financial sector being “too big”) and the micro problem (individual financial institutions being “too big”) are not necessarily identical. Even if the financial sector is small relative to the real economy, it may be comprised of banks whose incentives are misaligned due to “too big to fail” considerations. This can lead to excessive risk-taking and inefficient credit growth and has inspired recent changes to regulation and prudential policy. For example, Basel III includes a revised leverage ratio framework that has the goal of preventing banks from operating with excessive leverage. This should reduce the discrepancy between social and private returns in banking and limit the rents extracted by the financial sector. A similar role is envisaged for recent rules on liquidity coverage. The size of individual banks is also a relevant consideration (albeit not the primary one) when it comes to measuring their importance in terms of systemic risk and determining their contribution to the Single Resolution Fund. Finally, some recent suggestions for regulatory reform propose separating activities that are currently implemented by commercial banks under “one roof”, limiting the size of individual banks and at the same time increasing the relative importance of traditional financial intermediation activities. Timely data reporting is another critical issue because policy-makers need to know in real time what is going on inside the system. The Financial Stability Board’s work on data harmonisation and on filling data gaps [16] is critical in this respect. Finally, Europe needs to move towards the re-creation of a genuine single market for capital. By this, I do not mean the convergence of prices for euro-denominated financial assets. The crisis provided a painful reminder of the limitations of such measures of financial integration. What I have in mind instead is “genuine” integration, whereby financial resources are allocated with reference to the risk-return relationship and not to location ‒ a process which would improve economic diversification in that it would cushion both entrepreneurs and households against local shocks [17]. This should naturally reduce the negative impact of an overextended financial sector by decreasing the probability of inefficient booms and severe busts. How can a single market for capital be realised? In addition to the better integration of governance that I have just talked about, the process rests on the improved integration of retail banking and capital markets. As regards retail banking, even before the crisis, we at the ECB acknowledged that this is one of the least integrated markets in the euro area [18]. The crisis undermined the process of integration by prompting a further retrenching of retail banking services within national borders. The new regulatory and supervisory framework has the potential to steer us towards deeper cross-border integration, and, in the process, to address Europe’s over-reliance on large banks. Evidence before the crisis suggested that the integration of retail lending markets may be a more efficient mechanism for cross-border risk-sharing than secured or unsecured interbank markets. It is important that the banking union and the regulation against the “too big to fail” problem effectively encourage banks to reach an optimal size relative to the European market – that is, large enough to operate across borders and diversify risks, but small enough to be resolved with the resources of the Single Resolution Fund. This would be Europe's best contribution in terms of improving the trade-off between financial stability and economic efficiency.Regarding capital market integration, things can only improve in the future, given Europe’s high reliance on bank funding. It is likely that the ongoing deleveraging of the global banking sector will stimulate the development of non-bank financial intermediation in Europe. As a sign of things to come, the decline in bank credit is already to some extent compensated for by an increased issuance of corporate bonds. And the recent initiatives to create an active market for high-quality securitisation [19] will help further in this direction.Let me conclude.The global financial crisis was, to a large extent, driven by an oversized and overleveraged financial sector whose risk-creating capacity was left unchecked by regulators and supervisors. We believe that we have learned our lesson and the recent flurry of policy initiatives reflect, in large measure, our new understanding of the destabilizing role of an oversized financial sector. The academic literature, as well as our own experience in the crisis, has proven that the size of the financial sector can exacerbate the trade-off between economic efficiency and financial stability. I hope that the regulatory reforms that are now being enacted and the recent changes in the European supervisory architecture, combined with the renewed push for a single market for capital in Europe, will go some way in addressing this trade-off. Thank you very much for your kind attention.[1]I would like to thank Alexander Popov for his contributions to this speech. I am also grateful to Philipp Hartmann for his comments. All views expressed here remain mine.[2]See, e.g., Rajan, R., and L. Zingales, 1998, Financial dependence and growth, American Economic Review 88, 559-586; Hartmann, P, Heider, F., Papaioannou, E., and M. Lo Duca, 2007, The role of financial markets and innovation in productivity and growth in Europe, ECB Occasional Paper No 72. For a thorough review, see Levine, R., 2005, Finance and growth: Theory, evidence, and mechanisms, in The Handbook of Economic Growth, eds. P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, North Holland: Amsterdam. [3]Greenspan, A., 1998. “Is there a new economy?” Remarks at the Haas Annual Business Faculty Research Dialogue, University of California, Berkeley, 4 September.[4]Kaminsky, G., and C. Reinhart, 1999, The twin crises: The causes of banking and balance-of-payments problems, American Economic Review 89, 473-500. [5]Laeven, L., and F. Valencia, 2013, The real effects of financial sector interventions during the crisis, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 45, 147-177.[6]Brunnermeier, M., and Y. Sannikov, 2014, A macroeconomic model with a financial sector, American Economic Review 104, 379-421.[7]Rioja, F., Valev, N., 2004, Does one size fit all? A reexamination of the finance and growth relationship, Journal of Development Economics 74, 429–447; Shen, C., Lee, C., 2006, Same financial development yet different economic growth - why?, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 38, 1907–1944; Arcand, J.-L., Berkes, E., and U. Panizza, 2012, Too much finance?, IMF Working Paper 12/161; Manganelli, S., and A. Popov, 2013, Financial dependence, global growth opportunities, and growth revisited, Economics Letters 120, 123-125; Beck, R., Georgiadis, G., and R. Straub, 2014, The finance and growth nexus revisited, Economics Letters, forthcoming.[8]De Jonge, O., 2010, Back to the basics in banking? A micro-analysis of banking system stability, Journal of Financial Intermediation 19(3), 387-417, Demirguc-Kunt, A., and H. Huizinga, 2010. Bank activity and funding strategies: The impact on risk and return. Journal of Financial Economics 98, 626-650, or Hahm, J.-H., H.S. Shin and K. Shin (2013), Noncore bank liabilities and financial vulnerability, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 45(s1), 3-36.[9]Tobin, J., 1984, On the efficiency of the financial system, Lloyds Bank Review 153, 1–15; Philippon, T., 2010, Financiers vs. engineers: should the financial sector be taxed or subsidized?, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2, 158–182; Bolton, P., Santos, T., and J. Scheinkman, 2011, Cream skimming in financial markets, NBER Working Paper 16804; Kneer, C., 2013, The absorption of talent into finance: Evidence from US banking deregulation, DNB Working Paper 391. [10]Hellmann, T., Murdock, K., and J. Stiglitz, 2000. Liberalization, moral hazard in banking, and prudential regulation: Are capital requirements enough? American Economic Review 90, 147-165.[11]Schaeck, K., Cihak, M., and S. Wolfe, 2009. Are competitive banking systems more stable? Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 41, 711-734.[12]Jimenez, G., Ongena, S., Peydro, J.-L.,and J. Saurina, 2014. Hazardous times for monetary policy: What do 23 million loans say about the impact of monetary policy on credit risk-taking? Econometrica 82, 463-505.[13]Brunnermeier, M., and Y. Sannikov, 2014. The I theory of money. Princeton University working paper.[14]See Haldane, A., and V. Madouros, 2012. The dog and the frisbee. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 36th Economic Symposium, 109-159.[15]Is Europe overbanked? Report of the Advisory Scientific Committee of the European Systemic Risk Board, No 4/June 2014.[16]Please refer to the Financial Stability Board data gaps initiative and the consultation paper of the Aggregation Feasibility Study Group on approaches to aggregate OTC derivatives data, February 2014.[17]It should be noted, however, that financial integration can foster the specialisation of production across countries because financial intermediaries having a comparative advantage in lending to local industries can “reinsure” across borders. This can be more profitable but increases the exposure of domestic intermediaries to local shocks as well as cross-border contagion risk. The overall effect is ambiguous and can be positive under some assumptions. See Fecht, Grüner, H.P., and P. Hartmann, 2012. Financial integration, specialization and systemic risk, Journal of International Economics.[18]European Central Bank “Financial Integration in Europe”, April 2008.[19]Bank of England and European Central Bank, 2014. The case for a better functioning securitisation market in the European Union, Joint Discussion Paper, 30 May.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen thank much give opportun speak today recent global financi crisi made us rethink contribut financi sector real economi today talk understand financ growth nexus chang past year policymak europ particular european central bank ecb use knowledg year prior financi crisi empir literatur financ growth accumul substanti bodi evid suggest financi sector deepen key compon econom develop process appear true respect emerg market industrialis economi encourag evid policymak question abil financi sector innov channel fund social product use word feder reserv chairman alan greenspan financi system whose job ensur product use physic capit crucial part overal economi especi past two decad signal reflect financi asset price interest rate risk spread alter structur output recent decad toward differ view consum judg valu yet economi larg dynam complex financi sector immun sever macroeconom contract fact bank crise literatur provid evid causal link rapid credit growth system bank distress long emerg global financi crisi furthermor output cost sever bank crise found larg magnitud two observ contradictori necessarili relat wellunderstood econom mechan one hand matur financi industri ensur effici alloc product resourc support longterm growth hand excess leverag throw financi system crisi result deep abrupt econom downturn crisi made us understand size financi sector exacerb tradeoff econom effici financi stabil financ per se necessari growth overs financi industri detriment real econom activ cours question constitut overs financi sector complex one collect paper programm confer make great progress toward provid answer recent chang global regulatori architectur particular regard bank union europ part aim mitig negat effect larg complex modern financi industri chang implement way avoid elimin posit impact financi servic growth tackl financi complex over complic excess regulatori intervent addit policymak increas awar import overcom fragment european capit market achiev singl market capit regard link financ growth long time common say financ affect growth posit monoton way alway better recent empir evid howev qualifi convent wisdom analysi refin show beyond threshold size effect financ longterm econom growth weaken even becom negat effect financ growth nonlinear recent academ research put forward least five possibl explan first financi sector gradual extend scope beyond tradit activ intermedi toward socal nonintermedi financi activ trade evid strong suggest bank strategi heavili gear toward generat noninterest incom riskier chang focus natur associ higher potenti system crisi moreov result becom increas difficult come empir measur financi servic consist modernday financ actual especi true highincom economi whose financi sector particular sophist second financi system grow larg relat real economi extract excess high inform rent pay excess high wage exampl wake world war ii financi sector account less total labour incom share result much young talent realloc toward financi industri put blunt world crisi one mani banker engin particular type brain drain harm overal product real economi high ineffici social return financi servic lower privat return probabl case financi sector larg begin third expans financi sector signal misalloc credit less product econom activ textbook model financi intermedi usual assum mobilis save entrepreneuri credit howev much spike financi intermedi crisi associ household credit most mortgag credit fact number countri e g canada denmark netherland loan household account overal bank lend case addit euro mortgag lend contribut less overal econom growth addit euro credit young innov compani fourth overs financi sector reflect increas risktak exampl argu increas bank competit erod individu bank franchis valu turn encourag bank engag imprud behaviour competit behaviour increas resili system competit market structur weaken similar logic appli environ liquid abund result accommod monetari polici outlin risktak view monetari polici transmiss leverag financi system high insid money creation combin environ exacerb moral hazard problem bank sector increas bank appetit risk meanwhil increas risktak make individu bank bank sector whole fragil increas probabl system meltdown therebi harm longterm growth last least link size financi sector complex like complex interconnected financi institut increas presum nonlinear way size overal financi system make difficult regul understand go within bound policymak allow financi system balloon without avail instrument understand complex monitor propag shock cannot afford caught guard simpli guess real problem may lie identifi problem solut wake financi crisi global regulatori architectur evolv meet challeng pose financi sector potenti generat econom distress one proceed toward integr govern bank sector europ first compon genuin bank union singl supervisori mechan singl resolut mechan alreadi implement aim make bank activ conduct europ safer bank union implicit touch aspect overs financ general overbank particular need mind fact macro problem financi sector big micro problem individu financi institut big necessarili ident even financi sector small relat real economi may compris bank whose incent misalign due big fail consider lead excess risktak ineffici credit growth inspir recent chang regul prudenti polici exampl basel iii includ revis leverag ratio framework goal prevent bank oper excess leverag reduc discrep social privat return bank limit rent extract financi sector similar role envisag recent rule liquid coverag size individu bank also relev consider albeit primari one come measur import term system risk determin contribut singl resolut fund final recent suggest regulatori reform propos separ activ current implement commerci bank one roof limit size individu bank time increas relat import tradit financi intermedi activ time data report anoth critic issu policymak need know real time go insid system financi stabil board work data harmonis fill data gap critic respect final europ need move toward recreat genuin singl market capit mean converg price eurodenomin financi asset crisi provid pain remind limit measur financi integr mind instead genuin integr wherebi financi resourc alloc refer riskreturn relationship locat process would improv econom diversif would cushion entrepreneur household local shock natur reduc negat impact overextend financi sector decreas probabl ineffici boom sever bust singl market capit realis addit better integr govern talk process rest improv integr retail bank capit market regard retail bank even crisi ecb acknowledg one least integr market euro area crisi undermin process integr prompt retrench retail bank servic within nation border new regulatori supervisori framework potenti steer us toward deeper crossbord integr process address europ overreli larg bank evid crisi suggest integr retail lend market may effici mechan crossbord riskshar secur unsecur interbank market import bank union regul big fail problem effect encourag bank reach optim size relat european market larg enough oper across border diversifi risk small enough resolv resourc singl resolut fund would europ best contribut term improv tradeoff financi stabil econom effici regard capit market integr thing improv futur given europ high relianc bank fund like ongo deleverag global bank sector stimul develop nonbank financi intermedi europ sign thing come declin bank credit alreadi extent compens increas issuanc corpor bond recent initi creat activ market highqual securitis help direct let conclud global financi crisi larg extent driven overs overleverag financi sector whose riskcreat capac left uncheck regul supervisor believ learn lesson recent flurri polici initi reflect larg measur new understand destabil role overs financi sector academ literatur well experi crisi proven size financi sector exacerb tradeoff econom effici financi stabil hope regulatori reform enact recent chang european supervisori architectur combin renew push singl market capit europ go way address tradeoff thank much kind attent would like thank alexand popov contribut speech also grate hartmann comment view express remain mine see e g rajan r l zingal financi depend growth american econom review hartmann p heider f papaioannou e m lo duca role financi market innov product growth europ ecb occasion paper thorough review see levin r financ growth theori evid mechan handbook econom growth ed p aghion durlauf north holland amsterdam greenspan new economi remark haa annual busi faculti research dialogu univers california berkeley septemb kaminski g c reinhart twin crise caus bank balanceofpay problem american econom review laeven l f valencia real effect financi sector intervent crisi journal money credit bank brunnermei m y sannikov macroeconom model financi sector american econom review rioja f valev n one size fit reexamin financ growth relationship journal develop econom shen c lee c financi develop yet differ econom growth journal money credit bank arcand j l berk e u panizza much financ imf work paper manganelli popov financi depend global growth opportun growth revisit econom letter beck r georgiadi g r straub financ growth nexus revisit econom letter forthcom de jong o back basic bank microanalysi bank system stabil journal financi intermedi demirguckunt h huizinga bank activ fund strategi impact risk return journal financi econom hahm j h h shin k shin noncor bank liabil financi vulner journal money credit bank tobin j effici financi system lloyd bank review philippon financi vs engin financi sector tax subsid american econom journal macroeconom bolton p santo j scheinkman cream skim financi market nber work paper kneer c absorpt talent financ evid us bank deregul dnb work paper hellmann murdock k j stiglitz liber moral hazard bank prudenti regul capit requir enough american econom review schaeck k cihak m wolf competit bank system stabl journal money credit bank jimenez g ongena peydro j l j saurina hazard time monetari polici million loan say impact monetari polici credit risktak econometrica brunnermei m y sannikov theori money princeton univers work paper see haldan v madouro dog frisbe feder reserv bank kansa citi th econom symposium europ overbank report advisori scientif committe european system risk board june pleas refer financi stabil board data gap initi consult paper aggreg feasibl studi group approach aggreg otc deriv data februari note howev financi integr foster specialis product across countri financi intermediari compar advantag lend local industri reinsur across border profit increas exposur domest intermediari local shock well crossbord contagion risk overal effect ambigu posit assumpt see fecht grüner h p p hartmann financi integr special system risk journal intern econom european central bank financi integr europ april bank england european central bank case better function securitis market european union joint discuss paper may reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en