Jürgen Stark: Taking stock: where do we stand in the crisis?,15-04-2010,European Central Bank,ECB,2299,"<p>Ladies and gentlemen,In autumn 2008, the world economy entered the worst financial crisis and the deepest recession since the Great Depression. Both monetary and fiscal policies responded vigorously to this exceptional situation and contributed to the emergence of a recovery in the course of 2009. Hence, after falling last year, global activity is expected to grow by around 4% this year, while global trade is expected to grow by almost 6% [IMF January WEO update]. Strong growth in emerging market economies in Asia is a major driving force behind these figures, while growth in many advanced economies is forecast to be weak. Questions can be raised as to whether such an uneven pattern of the recovery will prove sustainable.In the euro area, recent information indicates that the recovery has continued to expand in the first few months of this year. Looking forward, euro area growth is expected to remain moderate, owing to ongoing balance sheet adjustments in the private sector, weak prospects for the labour market and low capacity utilisation. Available growth forecasts for 2010 put it at, on average, around 1%. The crisis is also expected to have lasting effects on our economy, as both the level and the growth rate of potential output are most likely reduced for a longer time.Turning to price developments in the euro area, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual inflation increased to 1.5% in March, from 0.9% in February. This was higher than expected. While this does not change our assessment, it is important to understand whether the surge in inflation in March is temporary or more lasting in nature. This is difficult to assess without a breakdown of developments in the overall HICP, which will only become available tomorrow [16 April]. However, it seems reasonable to consider energy and food prices as the main drivers behind the higher than expected inflation outcome in March.Looking ahead, we expect inflation in the euro area to remain moderate over the policy-relevant horizon. The outcome of our monetary analysis confirms the assessment of low inflationary pressures over the medium term, with money and credit growth remaining weak.At the same time, we need to monitor price developments in the more dynamic regions of the world very closely, as well as the evolution of commodity prices and their potential impact on global inflation. Notably, a multi-speed recovery of the world economy, with some regions growing fast, while the recovery in others remains rather slow, has the potential to exert upward pressure on prices. In the same vein, we also need to monitor very closely the possible adverse impact from fiscal developments on the inflation outlook. The outlook for commodity prices seems to tilt the risks toward the upside. This notwithstanding, inflation expectations remain firmly anchored in line with our aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.Let me turn to the banking sector. Adjustments are continuing in light of a re-focusing on core business and markets, the necessary re-organisation arising from state aid and forthcoming changes to regulatory environment. Although there have been improvements, profitability remains subdued. Further credit-related write-downs are expected throughout this year, and the risk of a negative feedback loop emerging between the household and corporate sectors and the banks persists. Banks’ may remain under pressure to continue the process of de-leveraging, with possible credit constraints impacting on economic growth in the event of credit demand picking up.Thus, although the response of policy-makers to the crisis has certainly helped to avert an even more dramatic collapse in economic activity in the euro area and elsewhere, challenges abound. Indeed, most advanced economies will continue to face severe macroeconomic imbalances in the years to come. I am particularly concerned about the dramatic deterioration in public finances, which will require very ambitious fiscal consolidation efforts in the years to come. We may already have entered into the next phase of the crisis: a sovereign debt crisis following on the financial and economic crisis.Fiscal policy challenges Most governments in the advanced countries will exit from the recession with the highest deficit and debt-to-GDP ratios recorded in times of peace. [Show slide 1, 2 and 3]As can bee seen in the chart, the general government deficit in the euro area is expected, according to the latest projections by the European Commission, to exceed 6.0% of GDP in 2009, 2010 and 2011. In Japan, the government deficit-to-GDP ratio is foreseen to reach around 9.0% of GDP in these years, whereas the UK and US government deficits are expected to be in excess of 10.0% of GDP in the period 2009-11. These high government deficits are reflected in mounting government debt, which will reach 88% of GDP in 2011 in both the euro area and the United Kingdom, 100% of GDP in the United States and 200% of GDP in Japan. These developments are the consequence of sizeable fiscal stimulus measures and of interventions in support of financial institutions in many advanced countries, but also of the sharp contraction in economic activity. In the euro area, adverse fiscal developments are a cause of particular concern in several countries, generally those that did not exploit more buoyant economic times to firmly consolidate their public finances. In the United States, too, some States [e.g. Arizona and California] have adopted a less prudent approach to the management of their public finances than others. [Show slide 4 and 5]There is no doubt that fiscal policies have been put on a path that is not sustainable. Indeed, as simulations for the euro area show, without a very ambitious fiscal adjustment effort, the debt ratio is projected to continue rising in the next decades. With an annual structural deficit reduction of only 0.5% of GDP, it will take the euro area 20 years or more to return to the pre-crisis debt-to-GDP level. Substantially stronger consolidation efforts are warranted to bring the debt ratio down to a more prudent level of below 60% of GDP and to prepare for the rising budgetary costs of the ageing population. [Show slide 6 and 7]The challenges are particularly large for countries with relatively high government deficit and debt levels, as well as a rapidly ageing society, and even more so for those that face relatively high interest rates and low potential growth.Outside the euro area, bringing the public debt ratio back to safer regions appears even harder for the United Kingdom, the United States and Japan. Given their high budget deficits and the high and rising debt levels, they must undertake very strong consolidation efforts to manage a reversal of the rising trend in public debt ratios. [Show slide 8]Growing fiscal imbalances, if not promptly corrected, are a cause of concern for several reasons. Let me focus on the three most important ones. First, high levels of government budget deficits and debt may push up inflation expectations and place an additional burden on the monetary policy of central banks and their task of maintaining price stability. Second, large fiscal imbalances may drive up (real) medium and longer-term interest rates, with adverse consequences for private investment. Given the large debt financing needs of many advanced countries, this constitutes a serious risk for the recovery. Moreover, rising interest expenditure on government debt reduces the scope for public spending on other, growth-enhancing items. Taken together, this would reduce long-term growth, especially in countries with high debt ratios. Third, deteriorated fiscal positions severely limit the ability of governments to counter adverse shocks, given the reduced budgetary room for the operation of automatic stabilizers. In addition, large budgetary imbalances reduce the scope for fiscal stimulus measures, and their effectiveness, as a fiscal expansion in the context of high and rising government debt may trigger an increase in precautionary savings and show negative fiscal multipliers.Against this background, it is now of the utmost importance that national fiscal policy-makers rapidly implement a credible and ambitious consolidation agenda. While fiscal consolidation may entail some costs in terms of lower economic growth in the short run, their longer-term benefits are largely undisputed. They consist, notably, of a reduction in governments’ debt financing needs, leading both to lower long-term interest rates (due to lower demand and declining risk premia) and to the release of revenues to finance more productive expenditure or growth-enhancing tax cuts. More leeway is then also created for the operation of automatic fiscal stabilizers in response to a cyclical downturn. In sum, fiscal consolidation is essential to secure public trust in the long-term sustainability of public finances, and to strengthen the foundations for sustained and durable growth.At the European level, fiscal consolidation should be in line with EU countries’ commitments under the Stability and Growth Pact, which provides the appropriate framework for the coordination of their fiscal policies. Given past experience of a slow and hesitant correction of excessive deficits, I see strong arguments for strengthening the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact and reinforcing its rules for fiscal discipline. This could be complemented with enhanced national budgetary rules and procedures that are consistent with the EU fiscal framework.Let me now turn to monetary policy and focus, in particular, on the response of the ECB to the crisis, and its current exit strategies.In response to the crisis and the ensuing subdued inflationary pressures, the Governing Council lowered its key interest rates to historically low levels. In particular, it reduced its main refinancing rate by 325 basis points to 1%, a level not seen in recent history in any of the euro area countries. Overall, the Governing Council still views these low policy rates as appropriate.To foster financing conditions and facilitate the transmission of lower key ECB interest rates to money market and bank lending rates, the Governing Council also introduced a number of non-standard measures. Notably, the Eurosystem provided unlimited liquidity to banks at a fixed interest rate and at maturities of up to one year. It also provided liquidity in foreign currencies, extended the list of eligible collateral and purchased covered bonds outright. These measures have contributed not only to lowering perceived liquidity risks on the part of banks, but also to a better flow of credit to households and firms than would otherwise have been the case.The ECB’s approach differs from that of some other central banks in many respects. Notably, our outright purchases of securities have been limited to the covered bond market, a market segment that is very important in Europe and a primary source of financing for banks. Moreover, we have refrained from buying government bonds. [Show slide 9]This has been different in other regions, especially in the United States and the United Kingdom, as you can see from this slide. Notably, in providing extra liquidity, we have relied primarily on repurchase agreements (red parts of bars), whereas the United States and the United Kingdom have focused on buying securities outright (blue parts of bars). From the very beginning, we have been aware of the fact that keeping our non-standard measures in place for longer than necessary would entail the danger of creating harmful distortions. Therefore, we designed the measures with exit considerations in mind. In view of the improvements in financial market conditions seen since last spring, we have started to gradually phase out some of them.More specifically, we have stopped providing liquidity in foreign currencies, and we have stopped operations involving maturities longer than three months. Also, we have decided to return to variable rate tenders in the regular three-month operations towards the end of this month.However, the Eurosystem will continue to provide liquidity support to the euro area banking system at very favourable conditions in its shorter-term refinancing operations (that mature after one week and after approximately one month). We have decided to do this for as long as necessary and at least until mid-October this year.The speed and path of the subsequent gradual phasing-out of the non-standard measures will depend on economic and financial market developments. The remaining measures are not many. They include, inter alia, the tender procedures to be applied in the main refinancing operations and the operations with a duration of one maintenance period, approximately one month (which could be returned to variable rate tenders). All our actions will remain fully in line with the objective of maintaining price stability over the medium term. We do not know today what normality will look like after the crisis. Likewise, we cannot be specific today about the design of the “final” post-crisis operational framework. Before deciding on this, we will need to consider thoroughly the lessons to be learnt from the crisis. However, the operational framework that prevailed prior to the turmoil seems to provide a good benchmark. It served us well prior to the crisis, and could be adapted quickly as circumstances worsened. Let me conclude. There is no doubt that the crisis will leave us a heritage of severe macroeconomic imbalances. Dealing with them will represent one of the most daunting challenges for policy-makers in modern history.Against this backdrop, let me emphasise that the Governing Council will continue to deliver on its mandate, which is to maintain price stability over the medium term. All our decisions regarding an exit from supportive measures need to be seen within this context. As regards fiscal policies, it is essential to prevent public finances from running out of control. Clearly, this will require a very ambitious fiscal consolidation effort. In particular, as regards the consolidation strategy, and given that the tax burden is already high in many countries, the fiscal adjustment will have to be primarily expenditure-based. Finally, let me stress that any call to reduce the real value of public debt through higher inflation will be firmly opposed by the ECB. A low and stable level of inflation is a prerequisite for confidence, stability and sustainable growth.Thank you.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen autumn world economi enter worst financi crisi deepest recess sinc great depress monetari fiscal polici respond vigor except situat contribut emerg recoveri cours henc fall last year global activ expect grow around year global trade expect grow almost imf januari weo updat strong growth emerg market economi asia major drive forc behind figur growth mani advanc economi forecast weak question rais whether uneven pattern recoveri prove sustain euro area recent inform indic recoveri continu expand first month year look forward euro area growth expect remain moder owe ongo balanc sheet adjust privat sector weak prospect labour market low capac utilis avail growth forecast put averag around crisi also expect last effect economi level growth rate potenti output like reduc longer time turn price develop euro area accord eurostat flash estim annual inflat increas march februari higher expect chang assess import understand whether surg inflat march temporari last natur difficult assess without breakdown develop overal hicp becom avail tomorrow april howev seem reason consid energi food price main driver behind higher expect inflat outcom march look ahead expect inflat euro area remain moder policyrelev horizon outcom monetari analysi confirm assess low inflationari pressur medium term money credit growth remain weak time need monitor price develop dynam region world close well evolut commod price potenti impact global inflat notabl multispe recoveri world economi region grow fast recoveri other remain rather slow potenti exert upward pressur price vein also need monitor close possibl advers impact fiscal develop inflat outlook outlook commod price seem tilt risk toward upsid notwithstand inflat expect remain firm anchor line aim keep inflat rate close medium term let turn bank sector adjust continu light refocus core busi market necessari reorganis aris state aid forthcom chang regulatori environ although improv profit remain subdu creditrel writedown expect throughout year risk negat feedback loop emerg household corpor sector bank persist bank may remain pressur continu process deleverag possibl credit constraint impact econom growth event credit demand pick thus although respons policymak crisi certain help avert even dramat collaps econom activ euro area elsewher challeng abound inde advanc economi continu face sever macroeconom imbal year come particular concern dramat deterior public financ requir ambiti fiscal consolid effort year come may alreadi enter next phase crisi sovereign debt crisi follow financi econom crisi fiscal polici challeng govern advanc countri exit recess highest deficit debttogdp ratio record time peac show slide bee seen chart general govern deficit euro area expect accord latest project european commiss exceed gdp japan govern deficittogdp ratio foreseen reach around gdp year wherea uk us govern deficit expect excess gdp period high govern deficit reflect mount govern debt reach gdp euro area unit kingdom gdp unit state gdp japan develop consequ sizeabl fiscal stimulus measur intervent support financi institut mani advanc countri also sharp contract econom activ euro area advers fiscal develop caus particular concern sever countri general exploit buoyant econom time firm consolid public financ unit state state e g arizona california adopt less prudent approach manag public financ other show slide doubt fiscal polici put path sustain inde simul euro area show without ambiti fiscal adjust effort debt ratio project continu rise next decad annual structur deficit reduct gdp take euro area year return precrisi debttogdp level substanti stronger consolid effort warrant bring debt ratio prudent level gdp prepar rise budgetari cost age popul show slide challeng particular larg countri relat high govern deficit debt level well rapid age societi even face relat high interest rate low potenti growth outsid euro area bring public debt ratio back safer region appear even harder unit kingdom unit state japan given high budget deficit high rise debt level must undertak strong consolid effort manag revers rise trend public debt ratio show slide grow fiscal imbal prompt correct caus concern sever reason let focus three import one first high level govern budget deficit debt may push inflat expect place addit burden monetari polici central bank task maintain price stabil second larg fiscal imbal may drive real medium longerterm interest rate advers consequ privat invest given larg debt financ need mani advanc countri constitut serious risk recoveri moreov rise interest expenditur govern debt reduc scope public spend growthenhanc item taken togeth would reduc longterm growth especi countri high debt ratio third deterior fiscal posit sever limit abil govern counter advers shock given reduc budgetari room oper automat stabil addit larg budgetari imbal reduc scope fiscal stimulus measur effect fiscal expans context high rise govern debt may trigger increas precautionari save show negat fiscal multipli background utmost import nation fiscal policymak rapid implement credibl ambiti consolid agenda fiscal consolid may entail cost term lower econom growth short run longerterm benefit larg undisput consist notabl reduct govern debt financ need lead lower longterm interest rate due lower demand declin risk premia releas revenu financ product expenditur growthenhanc tax cut leeway also creat oper automat fiscal stabil respons cyclic downturn sum fiscal consolid essenti secur public trust longterm sustain public financ strengthen foundat sustain durabl growth european level fiscal consolid line eu countri commit stabil growth pact provid appropri framework coordin fiscal polici given past experi slow hesit correct excess deficit see strong argument strengthen implement stabil growth pact reinforc rule fiscal disciplin could complement enhanc nation budgetari rule procedur consist eu fiscal framework let turn monetari polici focus particular respons ecb crisi current exit strategi respons crisi ensu subdu inflationari pressur govern council lower key interest rate histor low level particular reduc main refinanc rate basi point level seen recent histori euro area countri overal govern council still view low polici rate appropri foster financ condit facilit transmiss lower key ecb interest rate money market bank lend rate govern council also introduc number nonstandard measur notabl eurosystem provid unlimit liquid bank fix interest rate matur one year also provid liquid foreign currenc extend list elig collater purchas cover bond outright measur contribut lower perceiv liquid risk part bank also better flow credit household firm would otherwis case ecb approach differ central bank mani respect notabl outright purchas secur limit cover bond market market segment import europ primari sourc financ bank moreov refrain buy govern bond show slide differ region especi unit state unit kingdom see slide notabl provid extra liquid reli primarili repurchas agreement red part bar wherea unit state unit kingdom focus buy secur outright blue part bar begin awar fact keep nonstandard measur place longer necessari would entail danger creat harm distort therefor design measur exit consider mind view improv financi market condit seen sinc last spring start gradual phase specif stop provid liquid foreign currenc stop oper involv matur longer three month also decid return variabl rate tender regular threemonth oper toward end month howev eurosystem continu provid liquid support euro area bank system favour condit shorterterm refinanc oper matur one week approxim one month decid long necessari least midoctob year speed path subsequ gradual phasingout nonstandard measur depend econom financi market develop remain measur mani includ inter alia tender procedur appli main refinanc oper oper durat one mainten period approxim one month could return variabl rate tender action remain fulli line object maintain price stabil medium term know today normal look like crisi likewis cannot specif today design final postcrisi oper framework decid need consid thorough lesson learnt crisi howev oper framework prevail prior turmoil seem provid good benchmark serv us well prior crisi could adapt quick circumst worsen let conclud doubt crisi leav us heritag sever macroeconom imbal deal repres one daunt challeng policymak modern histori backdrop let emphasis govern council continu deliv mandat maintain price stabil medium term decis regard exit support measur need seen within context regard fiscal polici essenti prevent public financ run control clear requir ambiti fiscal consolid effort particular regard consolid strategi given tax burden alreadi high mani countri fiscal adjust primarili expenditurebas final let stress call reduc real valu public debt higher inflat firm oppos ecb low stabl level inflat prerequisit confid stabil sustain growth thank reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en