Mario Draghi: Opening statement at Deutscher Bundestag,24-10-2012,European Central Bank,ECB,1877,"<p>Dear President Lammert, Honourable Committee Chairs,Honourable Members of the Bundestag, I am deeply honoured to be here today. As President of the European Central Bank (ECB), it is a privilege for me to come to the heart of German democracy to present our policy responses to the challenges facing the euro area economy. I know that central bank actions are often a topic of debate among politicians, the media and the general public in Germany. So I would like to thank President Lammert and all Committee Chairs most warmly for this kind invitation – and the opportunity it gives me to participate in that discussion. It is rare for the ECB President to speak in a national parliament. The ECB is accountable to the European Parliament, where we have scheduled hearings every three months and occasional hearings on topical matters. We take these duties of accountability to the citizens of Europe and their elected representatives very seriously. But I am here today not only to explain the ECB’s policies. I am also here to listen. I am here to listen to your views on the ECB, on the euro area economy and on the longer-term vision for Europe. To lay the ground for our discussion, I would like to explain our view of the current situation and the rationale for our recent monetary policy decisions. I will focus in particular on the Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs) that we formally announced in September. Let me begin with the challenges facing the euro area. We expect the economy to remain weak in the near term, also reflecting the adjustment that many countries are undergoing in order to lay the foundations for sustainable future prosperity. For next year, we expect a very gradual recovery. Euro area unemployment remains deplorably high. In this environment, the ECB has responded by lowering its key interest rates. In normal times, such reductions would be passed on relatively evenly to firms and households across the euro area. But this is not what we have seen.In some countries, the reductions were fully passed on. In others, the rates charged on bank loans to the real economy declined only a little, if at all. And in a few countries, some lending rates have actually risen.Why did this divergence happen? Let me explain this in detail because it is so important for understanding our policies. A fundamental concept in central banking is what is known as ‘monetary policy transmission’. This is the way that changes in a central bank’s main interest rate are passed via the financial system to the real economy. In a well-functioning financial system, there is a stable relationship between changes to central bank rates and the cost of bank loans to firms and households. This allows central banks to influence overall economic conditions and maintain price stability.But the euro area financial system has become increasingly disturbed. There has been a severe fragmentation in the single financial market. Bank funding costs have diverged significantly across countries. The euro area interbank market has been effectively closed to a large number of banks and some countries’ entire banking systems. Interest rates on government bonds in some countries have risen steeply, hurting the funding costs of domestic banks and limiting their access to funding markets.This has been a key factor why banks have passed on interest rates very differently to firms and households across the euro area. Interest rates do not have to be identical across the euro area, but it is unacceptable if major differences arise from broken capital markets or the perception of a euro area break-up. The fragmentation of the single financial market has led to a fragmentation of the single monetary policy. And in an economy like the euro area where about three quarters of firms’ financing comes from banks, this has very severe consequences for the real economy, investment and employment. It meant that countries in economic difficulties could not benefit from our low interest rates and return to health. Instead, they were experiencing a vicious circle. Economic growth was falling. Public finances were deteriorating. Banks and governments were being forced to pay even higher interest rates. And credit and economic growth were falling further, leading to rising unemployment and reduced consumption and investment. A number of economies could have seen risks of deflation. All of this meant that the outlook for the euro area economy as a whole was increasingly fragile. There were potentially negative consequences for Europe’s single market, as access to finance was increasingly influenced by location rather than creditworthiness and the quality of the project. The disruption of the monetary policy transmission is something deeply profound. It threatens the single monetary policy and the ECB’s ability to ensure price stability. This was why the ECB decided that action was essential.So let me now turn directly to our recent policy announcements. To decide what type of action was appropriate, we had to make two key assessments. First, we had to diagnose precisely why the transmission was disrupted. And second, we had to identify the most effective policy tool to repair those disruptions, while remaining within our mandate to preserve price stability.In our analysis, a main cause of disruptions in the transmission was unfounded fears about the future of the euro area. Some investors had become excessively influenced by imagined scenarios of disaster. They were therefore charging interest rates to countries they perceived to be most vulnerable that went beyond levels warranted by economic fundamentals and justifiable risk premia.Clearly, it was not by chance that some countries found themselves in a more difficult situation than others. It was mainly those countries that had implemented inappropriate economic policies in the past. This is also why the first responsibility in this situation is for countries to make determined reforms and convince markets that they are credible. But many were already doing this, only for interest rates to rise even higher. There was an element of fear in markets’ assessments that governments, acting alone, could not remove. Markets were not prepared to wait for the positive effects of reforms to emerge.In our view, to restore the proper transmission of monetary policy, those unfounded fears about the future of the euro area had to be removed. And the only way to do so was to establish a fully credible backstop against disaster scenarios.We designed the OMTs exactly to fulfil this role and restore monetary policy transmission in two key ways.First, it provides for ex ante unlimited interventions in government bond markets, focusing on bonds with a remaining maturity of up to three years. A lot of comments have been made about this commitment. But we have to understand how markets work. Interventions are designed to send a clear signal to investors that their fears about the euro area are baseless. Second, as a pre-requisite for OMTs, countries must have negotiated with the other euro area governments a European Stability Mechanism (ESM) programme with strict and effective conditionality. This ensures that governments continue to correct economic weaknesses while the ECB is active. The involvement of the IMF, with its unparalleled track record in monitoring adjustment programmes would be an additional safeguard. So what are the likely consequences of the ECB’s actions? Before announcing the OMT programme, we considered very carefully the possible risks – and we designed our operations to minimise them. But I am aware that some observers in this country remain concerned about the potential impact of this policy. I would therefore like to use this opportunity to go through those concerns – one by one – and explain our views.First, OMTs will not lead to disguised financing of governments. We have specifically designed our interventions to avoid this. They will take place solely on secondary markets, where bonds that have already been issued are traded. If interventions take place, they will involve buying government debt from investors, not from governments. All this is fully consistent with the Treaty’s prohibition on monetary financing. Moreover, they will focus on shorter maturities and leave room for market discipline. Second, OMTs will not compromise the independence of the ECB. The ECB will continue to take all decisions related to OMTs in full independence. It will decide whether to intervene based on its own assessment of monetary policy transmission and with the aim of safeguarding price stability. The fact that governments have to comply with conditionality will actually protect our independence. The ECB will not be forced to step in for a lack of policy implementation. Third, OMTs will not create excessive risks for euro area taxpayers. Such risks would only materialise if a country were to run unsound policies. This is explicitly prevented by the ESM programme. And we have been very clear that each time a programme starts being reviewed, we will routinely suspend operations and resume them only if the review has been concluded positively. This will ensure that the ECB intervenes only in countries where the economy and public finances are on a sustainable path.Fourth, OMTs will not lead to inflation. We have designed our operations so that their effect on monetary conditions will be neutral. For every euro we inject, we will withdraw a euro. In our assessment, the greater risk to price stability is currently falling prices in some euro area countries. In this sense, OMTs are not in contradiction to our mandate: in fact, they are essential for ensuring we can continue to achieve it. Moreover, we see no signs that our announcement has affected inflation expectations. They continue to be firmly anchored. This is testament to our track record on price stability over the last decade and our credible commitment to maintaining price stability. The citizens of the euro area can be confident that we will remain permanently alert to risks to price stability. We have all the necessary tools at our disposal to maintain it and to withdraw any excess liquidity in case of upward risks to price stability.Let me conclude these opening remarks. Three elements are essential for understanding the policies of the ECB: immutable focus on price stability; acting within our mandate; and being fully independent.The ECB’s new measures help to ensure price stability across the euro area. They also contribute to improving the economic environment. But completing that task of economic renewal demands continuing action by the governments of the euro area. It is governments that must set right their public finances. It is governments that must reform their economies. And it is governments that must work together effectively to establish an institutional architecture for the euro area that best serves its citizens.We are already moving in the right direction. Across the euro area, deficits are being cut. Competitiveness is being improved. Imbalances are closing. And governments are working seriously to complete economic and monetary union.It is important that Europe’s leaders stay on course. In doing so, they will be able to unlock fully the enormous potential of the euro to improve living standards and carry forward the project of European integration.Thank you for your attention – and I look forward to our discussion.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",dear presid lammert honour committe chair honour member bundestag deepli honour today presid european central bank ecb privileg come heart german democraci present polici respons challeng face euro area economi know central bank action often topic debat among politician media general public germani would like thank presid lammert committe chair warm kind invit opportun give particip discuss rare ecb presid speak nation parliament ecb account european parliament schedul hear everi three month occasion hear topic matter take duti account citizen europ elect repres serious today explain ecb polici also listen listen view ecb euro area economi longerterm vision europ lay ground discuss would like explain view current situat rational recent monetari polici decis focus particular outright monetari transact omt formal announc septemb let begin challeng face euro area expect economi remain weak near term also reflect adjust mani countri undergo order lay foundat sustain futur prosper next year expect gradual recoveri euro area unemploy remain deplor high environ ecb respond lower key interest rate normal time reduct would pass relat even firm household across euro area seen countri reduct fulli pass other rate charg bank loan real economi declin littl countri lend rate actual risen diverg happen let explain detail import understand polici fundament concept central bank known monetari polici transmiss way chang central bank main interest rate pass via financi system real economi wellfunct financi system stabl relationship chang central bank rate cost bank loan firm household allow central bank influenc overal econom condit maintain price stabil euro area financi system becom increas disturb sever fragment singl financi market bank fund cost diverg signific across countri euro area interbank market effect close larg number bank countri entir bank system interest rate govern bond countri risen steepli hurt fund cost domest bank limit access fund market key factor bank pass interest rate differ firm household across euro area interest rate ident across euro area unaccept major differ aris broken capit market percept euro area breakup fragment singl financi market led fragment singl monetari polici economi like euro area three quarter firm financ come bank sever consequ real economi invest employ meant countri econom difficulti could benefit low interest rate return health instead experienc vicious circl econom growth fall public financ deterior bank govern forc pay even higher interest rate credit econom growth fall lead rise unemploy reduc consumpt invest number economi could seen risk deflat meant outlook euro area economi whole increas fragil potenti negat consequ europ singl market access financ increas influenc locat rather creditworthi qualiti project disrupt monetari polici transmiss someth deepli profound threaten singl monetari polici ecb abil ensur price stabil ecb decid action essenti let turn direct recent polici announc decid type action appropri make two key assess first diagnos precis transmiss disrupt second identifi effect polici tool repair disrupt remain within mandat preserv price stabil analysi main caus disrupt transmiss unfound fear futur euro area investor becom excess influenc imagin scenario disast therefor charg interest rate countri perceiv vulner went beyond level warrant econom fundament justifi risk premia clear chanc countri found difficult situat other main countri implement inappropri econom polici past also first respons situat countri make determin reform convinc market credibl mani alreadi interest rate rise even higher element fear market assess govern act alon could remov market prepar wait posit effect reform emerg view restor proper transmiss monetari polici unfound fear futur euro area remov way establish fulli credibl backstop disast scenario design omt exact fulfil role restor monetari polici transmiss two key way first provid ex ant unlimit intervent govern bond market focus bond remain matur three year lot comment made commit understand market work intervent design send clear signal investor fear euro area baseless second prerequisit omt countri must negoti euro area govern european stabil mechan esm programm strict effect condit ensur govern continu correct econom weak ecb activ involv imf unparallel track record monitor adjust programm would addit safeguard like consequ ecb action announc omt programm consid care possibl risk design oper minimis awar observ countri remain concern potenti impact polici would therefor like use opportun go concern one one explain view first omt lead disguis financ govern specif design intervent avoid take place sole secondari market bond alreadi issu trade intervent take place involv buy govern debt investor govern fulli consist treati prohibit monetari financ moreov focus shorter matur leav room market disciplin second omt compromis independ ecb ecb continu take decis relat omt full independ decid whether interven base assess monetari polici transmiss aim safeguard price stabil fact govern compli condit actual protect independ ecb forc step lack polici implement third omt creat excess risk euro area taxpay risk would materialis countri run unsound polici explicit prevent esm programm clear time programm start review routin suspend oper resum review conclud posit ensur ecb interven countri economi public financ sustain path fourth omt lead inflat design oper effect monetari condit neutral everi euro inject withdraw euro assess greater risk price stabil current fall price euro area countri sens omt contradict mandat fact essenti ensur continu achiev moreov see sign announc affect inflat expect continu firm anchor testament track record price stabil last decad credibl commit maintain price stabil citizen euro area confid remain perman alert risk price stabil necessari tool dispos maintain withdraw excess liquid case upward risk price stabil let conclud open remark three element essenti understand polici ecb immut focus price stabil act within mandat fulli independ ecb new measur help ensur price stabil across euro area also contribut improv econom environ complet task econom renew demand continu action govern euro area govern must set right public financ govern must reform economi govern must work togeth effect establish institut architectur euro area best serv citizen alreadi move right direct across euro area deficit cut competit improv imbal close govern work serious complet econom monetari union import europ leader stay cours abl unlock fulli enorm potenti euro improv live standard carri forward project european integr thank attent look forward discuss reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en