Benoît Cœuré: Is eurozone governance fit for purpose?,30-01-2014,European Central Bank,ECB,2465,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen [1],I would like first to thank the Centre for European Reform for inviting me here to speak today. The Centre is an influential think thank both in the UK and elsewhere in Europe, and its views certainly contribute to shaping the debate on the future of Europe.Let me start by linking the focus of my speech tonight with a topic which is high on the agenda here in London – as recently underlined by Mr Osborne. It is the allocation of competences between the national and the European level. What should Europe be in charge of? In which areas should Member States remain fully competent? Such questions are intensely debated on this side of the Channel. Tonight I would like to look at this issue from a euro area perspective, and more precisely, from the perspective of the euro area’s central bank, the ECB. How has the balance of competences between the national and the euro area level evolved during the crisis? Have we now found a more optimal balance which will support the stability of the single currency? I think this will provide a useful lens through which we can examine tonight’s question, namely “Is eurozone governance fit for purpose?”.The euro area is a unique project – unique because it binds together sovereign and diverse states; unique because it is trying to foster an ambitious process of economic and political convergence; and unique because it is the expression of a wider political project.These specificities mean that there is no ready-made governance model to draw on. Making the governance of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) “fit for purpose” is part of an evolving “learning by doing” process.Clearly, the Maastricht model – or at least its implementation by Member States – proved inadequate to pass the  economic  “fitness test” when the crisis erupted. Having monetary policy fully integrated while economic policies, still decentralised, were carried out with an insufficient European perspective, was lopsided. The past years have shown to what extent euro area economies and financial systems are interconnected; how decisions by individual countries can affect the entire currency union; and why national economic policies need to be seen as “a matter of common concern”. In other words, the balance of competences between the national and the European level was not commensurate with the requirements of a currency union.At the same time, I believe that replicating the model of fully-fledged federations in the euro area would not pass the “fitness test” either, mainly for political reasons. At this stage, a full integration of economic policies is neither desirable nor feasible. The wide range of preferences among euro area Member States means that progress on economic and fiscal union can only be gradual. There will be no sudden leap towards a fully-fledged political union. And you will never convince the people of Europe that further sovereignty sharing is needed without first showing them in a convincing way that Europe delivers jobs and stability.How can we steer clear of the minimalist and maximalist scenarios and be pragmatic in making the governance framework “fit for purpose”? In my view, the European level should be allowed to intervene in national policies – or even be granted new competences – only to the extent that is necessary to account for interdependencies (economists would say: to internalise cross-border spillovers). Equally, national economic policies should take into account the existence of potential spillovers to other members of the currency union.The approach followed so far implies that the competence for economic policy-making is increasingly being shared between the European and the national level. This brings challenges of its own, both in terms of the effectiveness and legitimacy of decision-making. Despite the inter-linkages, each level should be in a position to deliver on its own mandate. Correspondingly, citizens should be able to identify who is responsible for what. Here I believe that EMU still has some way to go before passing the “fitness test”. Let me now review in turn the economic and political dimensions of the “fitness test” of euro area governance. During the crisis, the ECB has fully played its role in line with its mandate. The ECB was faced with interrelated key challenges, namely extreme risk aversion and non- linear dynamics, deleveraging, fragmentation and a weak economic environment. Like other central banks around the globe, we have taken decisive measures to support medium-term price stability and improve the transmission of our monetary policy. This is not the focus of my talk but I am happy to return to it in the discussion. In addition, the governance framework for crisis resolution and prevention has been significantly improved. To the surprise of some, the crisis has shown the strength of the political commitment to the integrity of the monetary union. If one compares what exists now and what the framework was six years ago, one can notice the quantum leap that has been achieved. Let me elaborate.Regarding crisis resolution, Member States have put in place mutual insurance mechanisms, most notably the European Stability Mechanism (ESM); sharing financial risks among sovereign countries is undoubtedly a major political achievement. The ESM was created in order to provide financial assistance to euro area countries in financial difficulty. ESM interventions are conditional on Member States first signing a Memorandum of Understanding containing a programme for the needed reforms or fiscal consolidation to be implemented in order to restore the financial stability. The reform of EU governance is also about preventing future crises by remedying market and government failures. During the crisis, new safeguards have been established for this purpose: The fiscal and economic governance framework of the euro area has been reinforced through the adoption of a set of EU legal acts (the “six-pack” and the “two-pack”), as well as the Fiscal Compact. We have thereby achieved a twofold objective, namely a larger role played by Europe in national policies, as well as an internalisation of EMU constraints in the domestic frameworks. The reform of EU governance also aims to prevent future banking crises and break the bank-sovereign nexus. The establishment of the single supervisory mechanism and the adoption of bail-in rules in the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive mark significant progress towards preventing excessive risk-taking and making sure that the taxpayer is last in line to recapitalise banks. But we also need to have robust resolution arrangements at the European level. The single resolution mechanism should thus be able to act swiftly and needs ready access to a resolution fund. I’d be pleased to talk more about this in our discussion.Overall, significant progress has been achieved: We are now starting to see the results of these actions to resolve the crisis. Sovereign and corporate bond spreads are declining – it’s a clear sign that financial fragmentation has started to recede. This is confirmed by Target2 balances having decreased by nearly 40% from their July 2012 peak. Rebalancing is also on its way. Structural budget balances have significantly improved. Crucially, the public debt-to-GDP ratio has started to decrease at euro area level. Moreover, programme countries have rebalanced their current accounts, not only via demand compression but increasingly through genuine gains in competitiveness. To be sure, we cannot afford to be complacent. Debt levels and unemployment are high and unevenly distributed, and the nascent recovery remains weak and uneven. We also need to restore trust in the banking sector, which is key to improving lending conditions to the real economy. In this regard, the comprehensive assessment of euro area banks will be crucial. Moreover, with the new governance framework the Member States have taken key steps towards internalising economic and financial spillovers within EMU. This has entailed a shift of the balance of competences upwards: the central level has been substantially strengthened to make the euro area more stable and resilient. Fully enforcing the new rules of the game will however be the crucial test. At this stage, the implementation of the new macroeconomic framework has been somewhat disappointing in non-programme countries, notably regarding country-specific recommendations. It is more satisfactory on the fiscal side, but it will be essential that fiscal discipline is also fully enforced in good times, so that countries have enough fiscal space when the next crisis comes. The credibility of the new governance framework crucially hinges on the enforcement of our commitments, today and tomorrow.To this end, we need to improve effectiveness and legitimacy within the euro area. As I mentioned before, while economic policy-making is increasingly shared between the European and the national level, each level should be in a position to deliver on its own mandate. And citizens should be able to identify who is responsible for what. Only with a more efficient and legitimate decision-making will we be able to properly enforce the governance framework; only then will EMU be genuinely “fit for purpose”. This brings me to the political dimension of the “fitness test”.The Four Presidents’ Report identified “political union” as one of the four building blocks of a genuine EMU. It put forward a number of proposals. Some of the momentum behind the discussions on these proposals has been lost. It is not up to the ECB to promote them. But we would welcome policy-makers restarting the discussion and not shying away from ambitious proposals. I see several possible options to enhance effectiveness and legitimacy:First, by strengthening the European dimension of multilateral surveillance. A full-time Eurogroup President with proper analytical capacity and more autonomous decision-making powers could be a step in the right direction. This could be accompanied by stronger accountability towards the European Parliament, in particular for the implementation of the governance framework. Depending on how far they are developed, both ideas may require a change to the Treaties. Second, it would also be important to s trengthen the national ownership of the reforms prescribed by European procedures and recommendations. European issues and policies could more often be “invited” into the national debate and into national parliaments in order to bring them nearer to, and make them better understood by national citizens  The Commission’s Opinion on Member States’ draft budgetary plans, as mandated by the “two pack”, is an important instrument in this respect.By fostering a public debate and bringing political preferences closer together within the euro area, the move towards political union may in fact arouse interest in a further deepening of integration. Policy-makers and citizens may choose to integrate further in the future, going above and beyond banking union. This shows that the economic and political dimensions of the “fitness test” are closely intertwined and even mutually reinforcing: economic integration calls for political integration, and vice versa. Therefore, there is no such thing as an institutional steady state; the balance of competences is evolving over time. However, I believe this further sharing of sovereignty will only happen if Europe is able to deliver tangible progress for its people in terms of stability, growth and job creation. It is the only way to cut the Gordian knot and overcome the current vicious circle whereby a lack of integration leads to a poor economic performance and a lack of political support for Europe. This also applies to the ECB within its price stability mandate: making sure that inflation is below but close to 2% in the medium term should be our contribution to restoring trust in Europe.As a central banker, it is certainly not for me to prescribe what should be the next steps: they should emerge as the result of a political debate. What I can say is that there would be economic benefits from further integration. We learnt from the crisis that economic risk-sharing mechanisms are needed to making the euro area more resilient. However, there are some preconditions to be fulfilled before progress can be made in this direction. Drawing on John Rawls’ thinking [2], I would argue that Member States will agree on a new “social contract” only behind the veil of ignorance, not when the house is still on fire. The euro area thus needs to achieve a higher degree of economic convergence and to address the issue of the legacy arising from past national policy mistakes. In the meantime, a higher degree of risk-sharing can be achieved through market-based mechanisms. The completion of the banking union and a thorough implementation of the Single Market Act II as proposed by Michel Barnier are of utmost importance in this respect. From the ECB’s perspective, further risk-sharing should first and foremost focus on what could support a smooth functioning of the single currency. Further integration within the euro area raises the difficult issue of the relationship with the ‘outs’, in particular those with a permanent opt-out. The UK has made the sovereign choice to stay out of the single currency. It has to accept the full implications of this choice when euro area Member States need to integrate further. Of course, safeguards have to ensure full consistency with the Single Market, which is the European Union’s most valuable achievement. However, while such safeguards will have a bearing on the design of euro area integration, they cannot change its direction. And let's have our priorities right: the biggest threat to the Single Market is not euro area integration: it would be euro area stagnation.Ladies and Gentlemen,In 1946, Winston Churchill called for the United States of Europe. This did not pass the political “fitness test” at the time – and would probably not pass it today either. Subsidiarity has been and remains an essential principle of building a common Europe. The debates on the future of EMU governance and the debate on this side of the Channel on a competence review are not dissimilar in this respect. They boil down to the following crucial questions: what do we need and want to tackle together, with common policies and a strong centre? And what can be done nationally, regionally, locally? However, there is one important element we can still learn from Churchill. No matter how passionately we debate the right allocation of competences, the right governance, the right tools and methods, it must be clear that at the heart of all these choices, there is a strong commitment to building a strong, stable, open and diverse Europe together. I have no doubt about this commitment in our debate on the future of EMU. And I hope that the debate in this country in the coming years will confirm that there can be no doubt about this commitment in Britain.Many thanks for your attention.[1]I would like to thank Jean-Francois Jamet and Marion Salines for their contributions. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.[2]John Rawls, A Theory of Justice, Harvard, 1971Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen would like first thank centr european reform invit speak today centr influenti think thank uk elsewher europ view certain contribut shape debat futur europ let start link focus speech tonight topic high agenda london recent underlin mr osborn alloc compet nation european level europ charg area member state remain fulli compet question intens debat side channel tonight would like look issu euro area perspect precis perspect euro area central bank ecb balanc compet nation euro area level evolv crisi found optim balanc support stabil singl currenc think provid use len examin tonight question name eurozon govern fit purpos euro area uniqu project uniqu bind togeth sovereign divers state uniqu tri foster ambiti process econom polit converg uniqu express wider polit project specif mean readymad govern model draw make govern econom monetari union emu fit purpos part evolv learn process clear maastricht model least implement member state prove inadequ pass econom fit test crisi erupt monetari polici fulli integr econom polici still decentralis carri insuffici european perspect lopsid past year shown extent euro area economi financi system interconnect decis individu countri affect entir currenc union nation econom polici need seen matter common concern word balanc compet nation european level commensur requir currenc union time believ replic model fullyfledg feder euro area would pass fit test either main polit reason stage full integr econom polici neither desir feasibl wide rang prefer among euro area member state mean progress econom fiscal union gradual sudden leap toward fullyfledg polit union never convinc peopl europ sovereignti share need without first show convinc way europ deliv job stabil steer clear minimalist maximalist scenario pragmat make govern framework fit purpos view european level allow interven nation polici even grant new compet extent necessari account interdepend economist would say internalis crossbord spillov equal nation econom polici take account exist potenti spillov member currenc union approach follow far impli compet econom policymak increas share european nation level bring challeng term effect legitimaci decisionmak despit interlinkag level posit deliv mandat correspond citizen abl identifi respons believ emu still way go pass fit test let review turn econom polit dimens fit test euro area govern crisi ecb fulli play role line mandat ecb face interrel key challeng name extrem risk avers non linear dynam deleverag fragment weak econom environ like central bank around globe taken decis measur support mediumterm price stabil improv transmiss monetari polici focus talk happi return discuss addit govern framework crisi resolut prevent signific improv surpris crisi shown strength polit commit integr monetari union one compar exist framework six year ago one notic quantum leap achiev let elabor regard crisi resolut member state put place mutual insur mechan notabl european stabil mechan esm share financi risk among sovereign countri undoubt major polit achiev esm creat order provid financi assist euro area countri financi difficulti esm intervent condit member state first sign memorandum understand contain programm need reform fiscal consolid implement order restor financi stabil reform eu govern also prevent futur crise remedi market govern failur crisi new safeguard establish purpos fiscal econom govern framework euro area reinforc adopt set eu legal act sixpack twopack well fiscal compact therebi achiev twofold object name larger role play europ nation polici well internalis emu constraint domest framework reform eu govern also aim prevent futur bank crise break banksovereign nexus establish singl supervisori mechan adopt bailin rule bank recoveri resolut direct mark signific progress toward prevent excess risktak make sure taxpay last line recapitalis bank also need robust resolut arrang european level singl resolut mechan thus abl act swift need readi access resolut fund d pleas talk discuss overal signific progress achiev start see result action resolv crisi sovereign corpor bond spread declin clear sign financi fragment start reced confirm target balanc decreas near juli peak rebalanc also way structur budget balanc signific improv crucial public debttogdp ratio start decreas euro area level moreov programm countri rebalanc current account via demand compress increas genuin gain competit sure cannot afford complac debt level unemploy high uneven distribut nascent recoveri remain weak uneven also need restor trust bank sector key improv lend condit real economi regard comprehens assess euro area bank crucial moreov new govern framework member state taken key step toward internalis econom financi spillov within emu entail shift balanc compet upward central level substanti strengthen make euro area stabl resili fulli enforc new rule game howev crucial test stage implement new macroeconom framework somewhat disappoint nonprogramm countri notabl regard countryspecif recommend satisfactori fiscal side essenti fiscal disciplin also fulli enforc good time countri enough fiscal space next crisi come credibl new govern framework crucial hing enforc commit today tomorrow end need improv effect legitimaci within euro area mention econom policymak increas share european nation level level posit deliv mandat citizen abl identifi respons effici legitim decisionmak abl proper enforc govern framework emu genuin fit purpos bring polit dimens fit test four presid report identifi polit union one four build block genuin emu put forward number propos momentum behind discuss propos lost ecb promot would welcom policymak restart discuss shi away ambiti propos see sever possibl option enhanc effect legitimaci first strengthen european dimens multilater surveil fulltim eurogroup presid proper analyt capac autonom decisionmak power could step right direct could accompani stronger account toward european parliament particular implement govern framework depend far develop idea may requir chang treati second would also import trengthen nation ownership reform prescrib european procedur recommend european issu polici could often invit nation debat nation parliament order bring nearer make better understood nation citizen commiss opinion member state draft budgetari plan mandat two pack import instrument respect foster public debat bring polit prefer closer togeth within euro area move toward polit union may fact arous interest deepen integr policymak citizen may choos integr futur go beyond bank union show econom polit dimens fit test close intertwin even mutual reinforc econom integr call polit integr vice versa therefor thing institut steadi state balanc compet evolv time howev believ share sovereignti happen europ abl deliv tangibl progress peopl term stabil growth job creation way cut gordian knot overcom current vicious circl wherebi lack integr lead poor econom perform lack polit support europ also appli ecb within price stabil mandat make sure inflat close medium term contribut restor trust europ central banker certain prescrib next step emerg result polit debat say would econom benefit integr learnt crisi econom riskshar mechan need make euro area resili howev precondit fulfil progress made direct draw rawl think would argu member state agre new social contract behind veil ignor hous still fire euro area thus need achiev higher degre econom converg address issu legaci aris past nation polici mistak meantim higher degre riskshar achiev marketbas mechan complet bank union thorough implement singl market act ii propos michel barnier utmost import respect ecb perspect riskshar first foremost focus could support smooth function singl currenc integr within euro area rais difficult issu relationship out particular perman optout uk made sovereign choic stay singl currenc accept full implic choic euro area member state need integr cours safeguard ensur full consist singl market european union valuabl achiev howev safeguard bear design euro area integr cannot chang direct let prioriti right biggest threat singl market euro area integr would euro area stagnat ladi gentlemen winston churchil call unit state europ pass polit fit test time would probabl pass today either subsidiar remain essenti principl build common europ debat futur emu govern debat side channel compet review dissimilar respect boil follow crucial question need want tackl togeth common polici strong centr done nation region local howev one import element still learn churchil matter passion debat right alloc compet right govern right tool method must clear heart choic strong commit build strong stabl open divers europ togeth doubt commit debat futur emu hope debat countri come year confirm doubt commit britain mani thank attent would like thank jeanfrancoi jamet marion salin contribut remain sole respons opinion contain herein rawl theori justic harvard reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en