José Manuel González-Páramo: “What has Europe learnt from the crisis”?,15-03-2012,European Central Bank,ECB,1876,"<p>From its conception the euro was and has been a unique and ambitious project. It combined a centralised monetary policy with decentralised economic policies, and to paraphrase Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, created a currency that did not belong to a single nation-state. A key finding for the euro area, arising from the crisis, is that this construction was not complete. In particular, the euro area did not have certain institutions we associate with political federations and that act as shock-absorbers against the negative effects of imbalances. The key lesson from the crisis, therefore, is that the euro area needs to compensate for these “missing institutions” by establishing a much stronger economic and financial union.A central area where the absence of shock-absorbing institutions has been felt is via intra-euro area current account imbalances. These imbalances existed for many years prior to the crisis, but were largely ignored as theory told us that they could always be financed through cross-border financial flows. However, it is now clear that current account imbalances – while not being the only proximate causes of the crisis – are not benign and imply vulnerabilities which can be transmitted to the euro area as a whole. On the financial side of the current account, persistent intra-area imbalances imply that some public or private sectors are living beyond their means, year after year. If, as was the case in some euro area countries, these imbalances are also linked to the large build-up of external liabilities by an over-leveraged domestic banking system that engages in excessive risk taking, this may also create the conditions for the kind of twin sovereign-bank crises which we have witnessed over the recent period. Private liabilities can quickly become sovereign ones when governments are required to recapitalise banks or guarantee bank funding, leading to sovereign debt crises. At the same time, sovereign liabilities can undermine domestic banking sectors given the high exposure of euro area banks to their own governments’ debt and the link made by markets of the cost of funding of banks with that of their respective sovereign. Such negative effects may potentially be better mitigated in political federations given their stronger shock-absorbing institutions. For example, if a particular state in the U.S. were to experience a build-up in private sector liabilities that threatened its local banks, the responsibility for recapitalisation and deposit insurance would fall on the federal government – through institutions like the U.S. Treasury and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. This means that a U.S. state cannot be brought into financial difficulties by a mismatch between the size of its banking sector and that of its local economy, whereas a euro area country can – as we saw in Ireland.On the real side of the current account, persistent trade imbalances within the euro area also reflect accumulated competitiveness losses in deficit countries. The problem may be masked while growth is driven by credit and consumption, as was the case in some euro area countries before 2008. But when there is a reversal in financial flows and foreigners are no longer willing to finance the further accumulation of external debt, accrued competitiveness losses come to the fore. This can result in particular regions suffering sustained low growth and unemployment. Again, these negative effects may be more manageable with the shock-absorbing institutions of a political federation. A homogenous language and culture may facilitate labour mobility, providing one channel for adjustment – although recent evidence suggests this effect is not as significant in the U.S. as previously thought. At the same time, having a large federal budget creates a natural stabiliser as federal spending on “big ticket” items like social security, healthcare and defence redistributes incomes between rich and struggling regions.It is clear that the way ahead for the euro area cannot involve trying to construct the institutions of a political federation overnight. This implies that the euro area needs a different approach to ensure the smooth functioning of monetary union that can compensate for some of these “missing institutions”. This approach has two main pillars.The first pillar is to strengthen fundamentally the governance procedures which prevent imbalances from arising. With fewer shock-absorbing institutions to mitigate crises when they arise, the euro area has learned that it must become more effective at preventing imbalances. This process has involved tightening the rules for fiscal policies and creating a much needed framework to monitor broader macroeconomic imbalances and competitiveness.On the fiscal side, the reform of the Stability and Growth Pact and the new Fiscal Compact are specifically designed to catch imbalances earlier. A key focus of the SGP reform was to strengthen the so-called “preventive arm” – for example, sanctions are now possible for non-compliance with medium-term budgetary objectives. The Fiscal Compact supports this focus on prevention by creating a new “first line of defence”: balanced budget rules with a constitutional status. Importantly, this shifts the onus for enforcement away from Brussels and onto national institutions, encouraging greater ownership. Indeed, if applied properly, this Fiscal Compact would correct imbalances before the EU level rules ever need to be activated.On the broader macroeconomic side, the new Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure allows for early monitoring of – amongst other things – competitiveness trends, private sector credit flows and house prices. If excessive imbalances show up in these areas, sanctions [1] can be applied to euro area countries that do not follow recommendations to correct them. Under this framework, the kinds of credit booms and competitiveness losses we witnessed in the first years of the euro would be “flashing red” much earlier.I am aware that some criticise this process as asymmetric. While it is clear that the vulnerabilities created by large current account deficits are greater than those of surpluses – and therefore require more urgent remedies – the structural drivers of current account imbalances in surplus countries are also partly being addressed, even if not to the same extent as those in deficit countries. In parallel to the Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure, for example, the Commission intends to undertake further analysis on the drivers and possible policy implications of large sustained current account surpluses, including trade and financial linkages between surplus and deficit countries. It will also examine ways for further rebalancing current account imbalances, particularly at the level of the euro area, and within the global context. A key theme of the crisis response has also been a renewed focus on structural reforms as embedded in the Euro Plus Pact and Europe 2020 Strategy, which apply to all participating Member States equally.It would be naïve, however, to believe that with better governance crises could always be prevented. The second pillar to compensate for the euro area’s “missing institutions”, therefore, is to strengthen the way in which the euro area as a whole manages crises. Having witnessed how imbalances in one euro area country – no matter how small - can become systemic and create financial obligations for other taxpayers, the EU institutions, national governments and national parliaments are now playing a much stronger role in demanding and monitoring economic reforms.This shift is visible in much more active role of the euro area Heads of State or Government in the economic management of the euro area – now institutionalised in the form of the Euro Summit. It is also visible in the greater scrutiny applied by national parliaments to the economic policies of other Member States: for example, to approve financial assistance programmes a number of national parliaments now require EU-IMF compliance reports and debt sustainability analyses. This changing role of national parliaments underscores the recent observation by Herman Van Rompuy that national parliaments are increasingly EU institutions.The Commission is also gaining a much stronger crisis management through the new “two pack” legislation. The current proposals would allow the Commission to put any Member State under enhanced surveillance if it is experiencing or threatened with financial difficulties – regardless of whether it has requested financial assistance. This would imply stress tests of the banking sector by the EBA, monitoring of macro imbalances and regular review missions by the Commission in liaison with the ECB. Moreover, the Commission would be able to send back budgets that did not comply with the SGP before they had been adopted by national authorities.In other words, the euro area is responding to the crisis by creating a new and more comprehensive model of economic governance. This is aimed at preventing imbalances in all policy areas before they can trigger crises – and managing crises more effectively when they do arise. In many ways, this response is sui generis and departs from the template we associate with political federations. For example, the “two pack” gives the Commission the power to demand the kind of reforms that the U.S. federal government could not demand of a U.S. state. Moreover, the federal government would not be able to sanction a state if, for example, its tax code was leading to a local housing bubble. This is now not excluded in the euro area under the Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure. This new model is under development and still needs to be perfected – in particular in the financial sector, more work still needs to be done. That said, problems of regulatory arbitrage created by national level banking supervision are being addressed through an increasing harmonisation of supervisory standards and the establishment of a European System of Financial Supervisors with new European Supervisory Authorities. Europe is also exceeding international benchmarks in transposing the new Basel III rules. We may be seeing the beginning of a euro area framework for banking sector recapitalisation and resolution with the decision to allow the ESM to recapitalise banks in non-programme countries. Indeed, a modest first step that will be followed by others in the future.To conclude, the euro area has learned that the original design of EMU was incomplete, and is now working hard to complete it. For various reasons, the euro area is not in a position to adopt in the near term the institutions of a political federation. This means that it has to take a different road to increase overall stability and – in true European tradition – a sui generis approach is being developed that focuses on preventing imbalances and improving collective management of crisis.It is clear that this approach implies a loss of sovereignty. The crisis has proved that the euro area is a political entity which is not self-adjusting; it needs to be actively governed, and this cannot happen without Member States sharing more powers with each other. In other words, there has been a belated recognition that monetary union entails political union. This shift has profound implications for the involvement of all levels of governments in the European project: EU institutions, national governments, national parliaments, and even local governments are all required to participate in the common governance of the euro area. Managing this process represents the next great challenge of European integration. [1]Under the MIP, an interest-bearing deposit can be imposed after one failure to comply with the recommended corrective action. After a second compliance failure, this interest-bearing deposit can be converted into a fine (up to 0.1% of GDP). Sanctions can also be imposed for failing twice to submit a sufficient corrective action plan. Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",concept euro uniqu ambiti project combin centralis monetari polici decentralis econom polici paraphras tommaso padoaschioppa creat currenc belong singl nationst key find euro area aris crisi construct complet particular euro area certain institut associ polit feder act shockabsorb negat effect imbal key lesson crisi therefor euro area need compens miss institut establish much stronger econom financi union central area absenc shockabsorb institut felt via intraeuro area current account imbal imbal exist mani year prior crisi larg ignor theori told us could alway financ crossbord financi flow howev clear current account imbal proxim caus crisi benign impli vulner transmit euro area whole financi side current account persist intraarea imbal impli public privat sector live beyond mean year year case euro area countri imbal also link larg buildup extern liabil overleverag domest bank system engag excess risk take may also creat condit kind twin sovereignbank crise wit recent period privat liabil quick becom sovereign one govern requir recapitalis bank guarante bank fund lead sovereign debt crise time sovereign liabil undermin domest bank sector given high exposur euro area bank govern debt link made market cost fund bank respect sovereign negat effect may potenti better mitig polit feder given stronger shockabsorb institut exampl particular state u experi buildup privat sector liabil threaten local bank respons recapitalis deposit insur would fall feder govern institut like u treasuri feder deposit insur corpor mean u state cannot brought financi difficulti mismatch size bank sector local economi wherea euro area countri saw ireland real side current account persist trade imbal within euro area also reflect accumul competit loss deficit countri problem may mask growth driven credit consumpt case euro area countri revers financi flow foreign longer will financ accumul extern debt accru competit loss come fore result particular region suffer sustain low growth unemploy negat effect may manag shockabsorb institut polit feder homogen languag cultur may facilit labour mobil provid one channel adjust although recent evid suggest effect signific u previous thought time larg feder budget creat natur stabilis feder spend big ticket item like social secur healthcar defenc redistribut incom rich struggl region clear way ahead euro area cannot involv tri construct institut polit feder overnight impli euro area need differ approach ensur smooth function monetari union compens miss institut approach two main pillar first pillar strengthen fundament govern procedur prevent imbal aris fewer shockabsorb institut mitig crise aris euro area learn must becom effect prevent imbal process involv tighten rule fiscal polici creat much need framework monitor broader macroeconom imbal competit fiscal side reform stabil growth pact new fiscal compact specif design catch imbal earlier key focus sgp reform strengthen socal prevent arm exampl sanction possibl noncompli mediumterm budgetari object fiscal compact support focus prevent creat new first line defenc balanc budget rule constitut status import shift onus enforc away brussel onto nation institut encourag greater ownership inde appli proper fiscal compact would correct imbal eu level rule ever need activ broader macroeconom side new macroeconom imbal procedur allow earli monitor amongst thing competit trend privat sector credit flow hous price excess imbal show area sanction appli euro area countri follow recommend correct framework kind credit boom competit loss wit first year euro would flash red much earlier awar criticis process asymmetr clear vulner creat larg current account deficit greater surplus therefor requir urgent remedi structur driver current account imbal surplus countri also part address even extent deficit countri parallel macroeconom imbal procedur exampl commiss intend undertak analysi driver possibl polici implic larg sustain current account surplus includ trade financi linkag surplus deficit countri also examin way rebalanc current account imbal particular level euro area within global context key theme crisi respons also renew focus structur reform embed euro plus pact europ strategi appli particip member state equal would naïv howev believ better govern crise could alway prevent second pillar compens euro area miss institut therefor strengthen way euro area whole manag crise wit imbal one euro area countri matter small becom system creat financi oblig taxpay eu institut nation govern nation parliament play much stronger role demand monitor econom reform shift visibl much activ role euro area head state govern econom manag euro area institutionalis form euro summit also visibl greater scrutini appli nation parliament econom polici member state exampl approv financi assist programm number nation parliament requir euimf complianc report debt sustain analys chang role nation parliament underscor recent observ herman van rompuy nation parliament increas eu institut commiss also gain much stronger crisi manag new two pack legisl current propos would allow commiss put member state enhanc surveil experienc threaten financi difficulti regardless whether request financi assist would impli stress test bank sector eba monitor macro imbal regular review mission commiss liaison ecb moreov commiss would abl send back budget compli sgp adopt nation author word euro area respond crisi creat new comprehens model econom govern aim prevent imbal polici area trigger crise manag crise effect aris mani way respons sui generi depart templat associ polit feder exampl two pack give commiss power demand kind reform u feder govern could demand u state moreov feder govern would abl sanction state exampl tax code lead local hous bubbl exclud euro area macroeconom imbal procedur new model develop still need perfect particular financi sector work still need done said problem regulatori arbitrag creat nation level bank supervis address increas harmonis supervisori standard establish european system financi supervisor new european supervisori author europ also exceed intern benchmark transpos new basel iii rule may see begin euro area framework bank sector recapitalis resolut decis allow esm recapitalis bank nonprogramm countri inde modest first step follow other futur conclud euro area learn origin design emu incomplet work hard complet various reason euro area posit adopt near term institut polit feder mean take differ road increas overal stabil true european tradit sui generi approach develop focus prevent imbal improv collect manag crisi clear approach impli loss sovereignti crisi prove euro area polit entiti selfadjust need activ govern cannot happen without member state share power word belat recognit monetari union entail polit union shift profound implic involv level govern european project eu institut nation govern nation parliament even local govern requir particip common govern euro area manag process repres next great challeng european integr mip interestbear deposit impos one failur compli recommend correct action second complianc failur interestbear deposit convert fine gdp sanction also impos fail twice submit suffici correct action plan reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en