Benoît Cœuré: Duration Risk in the Financial System,25-06-2013,European Central Bank,ECB,3602,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen [1],It is a great pleasure for me to be here at this Euromoney conference. Today I’d like to consider the impact that volatile interest rates may have on the financial system. Let me state quite clearly that I do not intend to drop any hints about a change in the monetary policy stance in the euro area in the near future. A reversal would not be warranted by current economic conditions. Economic growth is projected to remain weak this year and inflation is expected to remain clearly below 2% for the euro area as a whole. The various non-standard measures that have been introduced by the ECB to support monetary policy transmission in certain market segments will stay in place as long as necessary, and there are other measures, standard and non-standard, that we can deploy if warranted. Therefore, at the current juncture, there should be no doubts that our “exit” is distant and our monetary policy is and will remain accommodative.However, these conditions are not permanent; interest rates will eventually increase, triggered by a tightening of the monetary policy stance, by an unwinding of global risk appetite, and/or by other external events. The recent bout of volatility in global fixed income markets is excessive in view of the current economic conditions, but it can serve as a useful reminder that such developments cannot be dismissed lightly. In fact, since the Great Depression a number of financial crises have occurred after a prolonged period of exceptionally easy monetary conditions. Some of you may remember the events of 1994, when even a gradual shift in the monetary policy after a low-rate period triggered severe turbulence on bond markets. For the United States, this concern was raised in a recent speech by Federal Reserve Governor Jeremy Stein. [2] He concluded that there are signs of a fairly significant pattern of “reaching-for-yield” behaviour in US corporate credit markets. However, he also commented that leverage in the short-term financing of credit remained modest and therefore the potential for systemic harm would be relatively limited.These developments trigger several questions: First, what are the channels through which a low interest rate environment can affect the financial system’s exposure to risk? Second, how sensitive are the balance sheets of euro area financial institutions to duration risk? Third, how should regulatory and macroprudential policies be designed to avoid the negative implication of rising interest rates? And what can be the role of standard and non-standard monetary policies to mitigate unwarranted volatility along the road? I will structure my remarks along the following lines. First, I want to review some of the recent literature on the relationship between monetary policy and the risk-taking behaviour of financial institutions, the so-called risk-taking channel of monetary policy. Second, I will present some evidence on the on-going search for yield in corporate bond markets. Third, I will also address specific challenges related to the fragmentation of the euro area financial markets. Fourth, I will draw upon forward-looking solvency analysis results published in the ECB’s most recent Financial Stability Review to discuss some of the consequences of various risks related to a re-emergence of risk aversion in several market segments. Finally, I will discuss the policy implications. One concern arising from a low interest rates environment is that the associated search-for-yield may induce excessive risk-taking behaviour by financial institutions.The recent crisis has rekindled the idea that prolonged lax monetary policy can lead to financial instability – what has been termed “the risk-taking channel” of monetary policy. There are four broad arguments which I would like to briefly discuss: asset substitution, search for yield, pro-cyclical leverage, and expectations of monetary policy reaction. [3]The asset substitution argument derives from standard portfolio theory, and it holds that a lower yield on safe assets will lead to a decrease in their weight in bank portfolios. Banks adjust their portfolio until risk-adjusted returns on risky and safe investments are again equalised. This results in a lower share of safe assets.A related mechanism operates through the search for yield. Financial institutions with long-term commitments (such as pension funds and insurance companies) need to match the yield they promised on their liabilities with the return on their assets. When interest rates are high, they can generate the necessary revenue by investing in safe assets. When rates are low, they are forced to invest in riskier assets to continue to match the yield on their liabilities. [4] Assume now that financial institutions target constant or perhaps even pro-cyclical leverage ratios. If monetary easing boosts asset prices, then bank equity will increase and banks will respond to the fall in leverage by increasing their demand for assets. This reaction reinforces the initial boost to asset values, and so on. The result of this “leverage channel” is a more fragile banking system. [5]Finally, monetary policy could also affect risk-taking through the expectation of a strong policy response to negative shocks. Since the 1990s, central banks have repeatedly provided liquidity to financial markets following market tensions. This channel has sometimes been called the “Greenspan put”. Of course, it can be objected that the asymmetric pattern of booms and busts in asset prices prompts an asymmetric monetary policy response. But it remains true that central bank liquidity provision, while necessary in crisis times, can distort the price signals and therefore the incentives of financial market participants. Financial players can afford to take ex ante extra risks, as they can rely on central banks to mitigate the consequences in case those risks materialise ex post. The bottom line of these four arguments is that lax monetary policy has the potential to reduce the market price of risk and thereby trigger a higher degree of risk-taking by financial institutions. Some recent empirical studies by ECB staff members lend support to these ideas. [6] [7]Of course, under certain circumstances, reducing the market price of risk and freeing up the risk-taking capacity of financial institutions is actually an outcome desired by monetary policy. Consider, for instance, the various non-standard monetary policies undertaken globally after the financial crisis broke out in 2009. They were designed to remove risk from balance sheets so as to avoid destructive fire sales and at the same time to enable banks to continue providing credit to the real economy by taking new risks. The concern is, however, that persistent liquidity sows the seeds for market turmoil. Unexpected events such as a shift in monetary policy or a change in economic growth prospects will inevitably affect the yield curve. Since banks carry out maturity transformation by borrowing short and lending long, and there are limits to their ability to hedge against interest rate risk, the result could well be an abrupt unwinding of risk-taking positions, putting financial markets under renewed stress.These risks are further exacerbated by the fact that banks operating under asymmetric information and limited liability will tend to take more risk than is socially optimal, since they do not internalise the losses they may eventually impose on taxpayers. A clear and consistent framework for bank recovery and resolution, including “bail-in” rules with a clear pecking order and limited exemptions, will be conducive to a stricter monitoring of risks by bank creditors. In fact, as I mentioned before, many of the most severe financial crisis since the Great Depression broke out after prolonged periods of exceptionally easy monetary conditions. Apart from the 2009 financial crisis, similar developments occurred in relation to the bursting of the New Economy bubble in 2001, the collapse of LTCM in 1998, and the bursting of the bond market bubble in 1994.Let me now turn to the current situation by showing you some evidence on the search for yield in the euro area, taking corporate bond markets as an example. (CHART 1) Let me start with some recent developments in European bond markets. Since early 2012, we have seen pronounced shifts towards bond holdings in investment funds and a general decline in yields across all risk categories. As Chart 1 shows, equity holdings of euro area investment funds slightly declined compared with 2011, whereas net flows into fixed income funds increased substantially. (CHART 2) As in the US, the search for yields in corporate bond markets in the euro area has intensified in recent months: corporate bond spreads are at historical lows. Chart 2 compares the historical evolution of yields on high-yield bonds with default probabilities. Yields are generally back to pre-crisis levels, but default probabilities are still significantly higher. One noticeable exception is provided by German corporate bonds, which have reverted to low default probabilities. The decline in yields of high-yield bonds is even more remarkable as the supply of those bonds has been shooting up recently. Total issuance of euro area non-financial corporate debt in 2012 was 60% higher than issuance in 2011, and it remained strong in the first months of this year. The share of high-yield debt in total issuance rose from one-quarter in 2012 to one-third in the first quarter of 2013, above the average recorded from 2006 to 2012. Overall, the evidence for the euro area on corporate bonds parallels the one for the US and the two markets appear closely linked to each other. As I have discussed before, an abrupt unwinding of these searches-for-yield – perhaps triggered by highly leveraged investors rushing for the exit – would be a source of concern for financial stability. However, the extent of the risk also depends on the degree of maturity transformation and the stability of funding. The unwinding of search-for-yield may emerge as a global phenomenon. However, there are specific issues related to the current heterogeneity of economic and financial conditions in the euro area. Let me focus on government bond and money markets.(CHART 3) Euro area government bond markets have appeared resilient recently. The dispersion of yields was low in the first quarter of 2013, and volatility remained close to its 2009 (pre-sovereign debt crisis) levels. Pivotal developments in reversing the deteriorating trend in confidence included the ECB’s announcements on the Outright Monetary Transaction (OMT) programme and European leaders’ commitment to establishing a banking union, along with noteworthy national developments, including the recapitalisation and restructuring of the Spanish banking sector. These are all positive developments, but there is certainly no room for complacency. Progress towards a genuine Economic and Monetary Union should be confirmed along the lines of President Van Rompuy’s report, starting with clear and predictable rules for bank resolution and with the establishment of a single resolution mechanism, complementing the single supervisory mechanism as the second pillar of the banking union. The continuation of the current low level of government bond spreads cannot be taken for granted, and countries’ efforts towards sustainable fiscal positions should thus continue unabated. A sudden re-pricing of risks may lead to an increase in spreads, despite the on-going fiscal consolidation efforts, and even more so in countries where consolidation has been delayed. [8] This would put renewed pressures on governments and revive the fragmentation of euro area bond markets. One possible strategy to mitigate this risk is to increase the average maturity structure of the debt, but the best remedy is to cut on the quantity of risk by swiftly improving government solvency. Money markets have also been affected by the low rate environment, but an increase in short- term interest rates may have an ambiguous impact. Since 2010, we have observed a significant decline in activity in these markets. Trading volumes in overnight interbank loans continued to decline in 2012 and are at very low levels by historical standards, some 60% below pre-crisis levels. This may not only reflect continued fragmentation, but also the effects of ECB liquidity operations, which have partly replaced market activities. In principle, there are various reasons for assuming that a rise in policy rates would revive interbank market activity. First, very low levels of interest rates may drive financial intermediaries, such as the money market funds, out of the market. Second, institutions without access to the deposit facility have to place funds with Eurosystem counterparties at interest rates below the deposit facility rate. At the current very low rates, these institutions may try to withdraw the funds from the accounts with their custodian bank, thereby reducing the supply of funds and potentially increasing banks’ funding costs. Therefore a rise in the policy rate may help to revive money markets by bringing back important financial intermediaries.At the same time, as I have argued before, higher rates may negatively affect the balance sheet positions of some banks. If this reintroduces asymmetric information in the interbank market and adverse selection through the exclusion of less reputable counterparties, the current market fragmentation and relatively low trading volumes may persist or even be magnified. Funding costs in the wholesale market may increase asymmetrically across euro area constituencies. Here, the best remedy is to restore full confidence in bank balance sheets through appropriate supervisory action.Let me turn to the final part of my presentation and look at some quantitative assessments of the various risks related to the current low interest rate environment. These assessments are based on the regular forward-looking solvency analyses conducted at the ECB. (CHART 4): I would like to discuss the results for four scenarios, including a current baseline scenario. The three alternative scenarios are related to a possible return of risk aversion and a rise in interest rates in various market segments:  A worsening of the sovereign debt crisis. This scenario assumes a permanent rise in euro area long-term sovereign bond yields due to low growth and delays in the implementation of fiscal and structural reforms. The increases are country-specific and range from zero impact to 370 basis points across countries. Further effects on the entire yield curve and other asset prices, notably equities, are taken into account.  Funding stress scenario. This scenario assumes the emergence of funding difficulties for banks in stressed countries that would arise from deposit outflows and reduced access to wholesale funding markets. This would imply higher interbank and customer loan rates. It would also induce banks to restrain their lending in order to comply with loan-to-deposit ratio targets – also in the light of the upcoming Basel III liquidity requirements.  Increased risk aversion. This scenario investigates the risks arising from a global unwinding of the search for yield. It assumes an abrupt increase in investor risk aversion worldwide, which results in stock price declines and a marked increase in corporate bond spreads, thereby raising interest rates in the more risky market segments. This would trigger a recession in the United States with negative implications for the global economic outlook. The details of these scenarios and the underlying methodologies are discussed in detail in the latest ECB Financial Stability Review from May 2013. Just let me say that they are designed to account for a number of transmission channels and the size of the shock is based on historical evidence. (CHART 5) The scenarios generate a rich set of results, but let me focus on the implications for bank capital. Under the baseline scenario, the core Tier 1 capitalisation of euro area large and complex banking groups would increase from 11.2% in the fourth quarter of 2012 to 11.3% by the end of 2014. Certainly, with regard to the findings of the adverse scenarios, they crucially depend on the implementation details of the individual scenarios. Nevertheless, we observe that a scenario configuration involving a rise in interest rates and asset price declines would in general tend to exert a negative influence on banks’ solvency positions. This being said, the decline in the large and complex banking groups’ core Tier 1 capital ratios under the adverse scenarios is found to be relatively mild, which is a sign of resilience among the largest euro area banks, also reflecting significant capital raising efforts in recent years. Specifically, the average core Tier 1 capital ratio would decline by 0.4 percentage points in the funding stress scenario, by 0.6 in the sovereign debt crisis scenario and by 1.1 in the global risk aversion scenario. However, the average numbers mask some dispersion across euro area countries.This analysis is focused on the banking sector. The situation in the euro area insurance sector differs somewhat. Insurance companies are also to some extent exposed to risks from shifts in sovereign bond yields and global risk aversion. Forward-looking analysis of the assets and liabilities of the euro area insurance sector indicates that the impact of these risks would remain limited due to comfortable capital buffers. For the euro area insurance sector, low yields on highly rated government bonds can constitute a solvency risk in the medium term. This holds in particular for those jurisdictions where a market-consistent approach to the treatment of liabilities is pursued. In this case, balance sheets are not only squeezed by the low profitability of assets, but also by the high value of liabilities. Although currently limited to only a few euro area countries, the liability effect will gain in importance on the eve of the introduction of the Solvency II regime.Let me conclude.Monetary policy has to support the economic recovery while avoiding another build-up of excessive financial imbalances, and there should be no trade-off between these two objectives.The monetary policy stance of the ECB will remain accommodative for as long as needed, and we will look with an open mind at standard and non-standard monetary policy tools if warranted by the outlook for price stability. In particular, we have to ensure that our effective monetary policy stance, as measured, among other indicators also by the term structure of money market rates, remains aligned with the Governing Council’s assessment, and with the outlook for price stability.The financial system should however be able to operate under a different constellation of yields. The current period of low interest rate should be used to prepare for it. A number of actions are needed that cut across policy domains and in many cases will take time to bear results. They should be high on the policy agenda.Let me highlight three of them, for which monetary policy cannot substitute.First, bank capital and liquidity buffers should be sufficient to withstand a normalisation of yields in all market segments. In Europe, this can be achieved within the framework of the banking union. Before the start of the single supervisory mechanism, the ECB and national supervisory agencies will conduct a balance sheet assessment that provides a health check of euro area banks, with adequate peer review and drawing as necessary on third-party expertise. A comprehensive stress testing exercise will then be launched in cooperation with the European Banking Authority that covers a wide range of scenarios. Prior to these exercises, a credible backstop facility needs to be in place that can address potential capital shortfalls in banks’ balance sheets. Second, regulatory measures aimed at curtailing excessive bank leverage, mitigating duration risk and avoiding excessive maturity transformation are needed to complement capital adequacy rules. Both the leverage ratio and the net stable funding ratio (NSFR) of Basel III are still under review, but the leverage ratio will be disclosed from 2015 and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision remains committed to introducing both ratios as minimum requirements in 2018, subject to a review period and proper calibration. I look forward to the outcome of the relevant work of the Committee.Third, governments that are lagging in their effort to consolidate debt and deficits should keep in mind that the current levels of yields cannot be taken for granted and that yield normalisation could take place in a differentiated way across jurisdictions, renewing the fragmentation of euro area capital markets.Thank you for your attention.[1]I wish to thank Gerhard Rünstler, Christoffer Kok and Matthias Sydow for their contributions to these remarks. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein.[2]See Stein, J. C., 2013, Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses, speech held at a research symposium at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 7 February 2013.[3]See, e.g., de Nicolò G. et al., 2010, Monetary Policy and Bank Risk Taking, IMF research department mimeo.[4]See Rajan, R.G., 2005, Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier? Proceedings, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August, 313-69.[5]See Adrian T. and Shin H.J., 2009, Money, Liquidity. and Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No 360.[6]One study used the volatility index (VIX) to test for the dynamic links between monetary policy, stock market volatility and risk aversion. It finds that lax monetary policy decreases risk aversion in the stock market after about nine months. This effect is persistent, lasting for more than two years. Moreover, monetary policy shocks appear to account for a significant proportion of variation in risk aversion. See Hoerova M., Bekaert G., Lo Duca M., 2013, Risk, Uncertainty and Monetary Policy, Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.[7]Another study found similar effects for loans. Low short-term interest rates soften credit standards for household and corporate loans, but especially for mortgages. This softening can be amplified by securitisation activity and weak supervision of bank capital and is more pronounced if policy rates remain low for a prolonged period. See Maddaloni, A. and Peydró, J.-L., 2012, Bank risk-taking, securitization and low interest rates, ECB Working Paper No 1248.[8]This is best understood if one decomposes the risk premium into a price and a quantity of risk. The quantity of risk reflects the country-specific economic and fiscal situation. The price of risk instead reflects the general conditions on financial markets. Even if the quantity of risk remains constant, an increase in the price of risk may lead to a generalised increase in spreads. See, e.g., Manganelli, S and Wolswicjk, G, 2009, What drives spreads in the euro area government bond market?, Economic Policy, 58: 191-240.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur euromoney confer today d like consid impact volatil interest rate may financi system let state quit clear intend drop hint chang monetari polici stanc euro area near futur revers would warrant current econom condit econom growth project remain weak year inflat expect remain clear euro area whole various nonstandard measur introduc ecb support monetari polici transmiss certain market segment stay place long necessari measur standard nonstandard deploy warrant therefor current junctur doubt exit distant monetari polici remain accommod howev condit perman interest rate eventu increas trigger tighten monetari polici stanc unwind global risk appetit andor extern event recent bout volatil global fix incom market excess view current econom condit serv use remind develop cannot dismiss light fact sinc great depress number financi crise occur prolong period except easi monetari condit may rememb event even gradual shift monetari polici lowrat period trigger sever turbul bond market unit state concern rais recent speech feder reserv governor jeremi stein conclud sign fair signific pattern reachingforyield behaviour us corpor credit market howev also comment leverag shortterm financ credit remain modest therefor potenti system harm would relat limit develop trigger sever question first channel low interest rate environ affect financi system exposur risk second sensit balanc sheet euro area financi institut durat risk third regulatori macroprudenti polici design avoid negat implic rise interest rate role standard nonstandard monetari polici mitig unwarr volatil along road structur remark along follow line first want review recent literatur relationship monetari polici risktak behaviour financi institut socal risktak channel monetari polici second present evid ongo search yield corpor bond market third also address specif challeng relat fragment euro area financi market fourth draw upon forwardlook solvenc analysi result publish ecb recent financi stabil review discuss consequ various risk relat reemerg risk avers sever market segment final discuss polici implic one concern aris low interest rate environ associ searchforyield may induc excess risktak behaviour financi institut recent crisi rekindl idea prolong lax monetari polici lead financi instabl term risktak channel monetari polici four broad argument would like briefli discuss asset substitut search yield procycl leverag expect monetari polici reaction asset substitut argument deriv standard portfolio theori hold lower yield safe asset lead decreas weight bank portfolio bank adjust portfolio riskadjust return riski safe invest equalis result lower share safe asset relat mechan oper search yield financi institut longterm commit pension fund insur compani need match yield promis liabil return asset interest rate high generat necessari revenu invest safe asset rate low forc invest riskier asset continu match yield liabil assum financi institut target constant perhap even procycl leverag ratio monetari eas boost asset price bank equiti increas bank respond fall leverag increas demand asset reaction reinforc initi boost asset valu result leverag channel fragil bank system final monetari polici could also affect risktak expect strong polici respons negat shock sinc central bank repeat provid liquid financi market follow market tension channel sometim call greenspan put cours object asymmetr pattern boom bust asset price prompt asymmetr monetari polici respons remain true central bank liquid provis necessari crisi time distort price signal therefor incent financi market particip financi player afford take ex ant extra risk reli central bank mitig consequ case risk materialis ex post bottom line four argument lax monetari polici potenti reduc market price risk therebi trigger higher degre risktak financi institut recent empir studi ecb staff member lend support idea cours certain circumst reduc market price risk free risktak capac financi institut actual outcom desir monetari polici consid instanc various nonstandard monetari polici undertaken global financi crisi broke design remov risk balanc sheet avoid destruct fire sale time enabl bank continu provid credit real economi take new risk concern howev persist liquid sow seed market turmoil unexpect event shift monetari polici chang econom growth prospect inevit affect yield curv sinc bank carri matur transform borrow short lend long limit abil hedg interest rate risk result could well abrupt unwind risktak posit put financi market renew stress risk exacerb fact bank oper asymmetr inform limit liabil tend take risk social optim sinc internalis loss may eventu impos taxpay clear consist framework bank recoveri resolut includ bailin rule clear peck order limit exempt conduc stricter monitor risk bank creditor fact mention mani sever financi crisi sinc great depress broke prolong period except easi monetari condit apart financi crisi similar develop occur relat burst new economi bubbl collaps ltcm burst bond market bubbl let turn current situat show evid search yield euro area take corpor bond market exampl chart let start recent develop european bond market sinc earli seen pronounc shift toward bond hold invest fund general declin yield across risk categori chart show equiti hold euro area invest fund slight declin compar wherea net flow fix incom fund increas substanti chart us search yield corpor bond market euro area intensifi recent month corpor bond spread histor low chart compar histor evolut yield highyield bond default probabl yield general back precrisi level default probabl still signific higher one notic except provid german corpor bond revert low default probabl declin yield highyield bond even remark suppli bond shoot recent total issuanc euro area nonfinanci corpor debt higher issuanc remain strong first month year share highyield debt total issuanc rose onequart onethird first quarter averag record overal evid euro area corpor bond parallel one us two market appear close link discuss abrupt unwind searchesforyield perhap trigger high leverag investor rush exit would sourc concern financi stabil howev extent risk also depend degre matur transform stabil fund unwind searchforyield may emerg global phenomenon howev specif issu relat current heterogen econom financi condit euro area let focus govern bond money market chart euro area govern bond market appear resili recent dispers yield low first quarter volatil remain close presovereign debt crisi level pivot develop revers deterior trend confid includ ecb announc outright monetari transact omt programm european leader commit establish bank union along noteworthi nation develop includ recapitalis restructur spanish bank sector posit develop certain room complac progress toward genuin econom monetari union confirm along line presid van rompuy report start clear predict rule bank resolut establish singl resolut mechan complement singl supervisori mechan second pillar bank union continu current low level govern bond spread cannot taken grant countri effort toward sustain fiscal posit thus continu unab sudden repric risk may lead increas spread despit ongo fiscal consolid effort even countri consolid delay would put renew pressur govern reviv fragment euro area bond market one possibl strategi mitig risk increas averag matur structur debt best remedi cut quantiti risk swift improv govern solvenc money market also affect low rate environ increas short term interest rate may ambigu impact sinc observ signific declin activ market trade volum overnight interbank loan continu declin low level histor standard precrisi level may reflect continu fragment also effect ecb liquid oper part replac market activ principl various reason assum rise polici rate would reviv interbank market activ first low level interest rate may drive financi intermediari money market fund market second institut without access deposit facil place fund eurosystem counterparti interest rate deposit facil rate current low rate institut may tri withdraw fund account custodian bank therebi reduc suppli fund potenti increas bank fund cost therefor rise polici rate may help reviv money market bring back import financi intermediari time argu higher rate may negat affect balanc sheet posit bank reintroduc asymmetr inform interbank market advers select exclus less reput counterparti current market fragment relat low trade volum may persist even magnifi fund cost wholesal market may increas asymmetr across euro area constitu best remedi restor full confid bank balanc sheet appropri supervisori action let turn final part present look quantit assess various risk relat current low interest rate environ assess base regular forwardlook solvenc analys conduct ecb chart would like discuss result four scenario includ current baselin scenario three altern scenario relat possibl return risk avers rise interest rate various market segment worsen sovereign debt crisi scenario assum perman rise euro area longterm sovereign bond yield due low growth delay implement fiscal structur reform increas countryspecif rang zero impact basi point across countri effect entir yield curv asset price notabl equiti taken account fund stress scenario scenario assum emerg fund difficulti bank stress countri would aris deposit outflow reduc access wholesal fund market would impli higher interbank custom loan rate would also induc bank restrain lend order compli loantodeposit ratio target also light upcom basel iii liquid requir increas risk avers scenario investig risk aris global unwind search yield assum abrupt increas investor risk avers worldwid result stock price declin mark increas corpor bond spread therebi rais interest rate riski market segment would trigger recess unit state negat implic global econom outlook detail scenario under methodolog discuss detail latest ecb financi stabil review may let say design account number transmiss channel size shock base histor evid chart scenario generat rich set result let focus implic bank capit baselin scenario core tier capitalis euro area larg complex bank group would increas fourth quarter end certain regard find advers scenario crucial depend implement detail individu scenario nevertheless observ scenario configur involv rise interest rate asset price declin would general tend exert negat influenc bank solvenc posit said declin larg complex bank group core tier capit ratio advers scenario found relat mild sign resili among largest euro area bank also reflect signific capit rais effort recent year specif averag core tier capit ratio would declin percentag point fund stress scenario sovereign debt crisi scenario global risk avers scenario howev averag number mask dispers across euro area countri analysi focus bank sector situat euro area insur sector differ somewhat insur compani also extent expos risk shift sovereign bond yield global risk avers forwardlook analysi asset liabil euro area insur sector indic impact risk would remain limit due comfort capit buffer euro area insur sector low yield high rate govern bond constitut solvenc risk medium term hold particular jurisdict marketconsist approach treatment liabil pursu case balanc sheet squeez low profit asset also high valu liabil although current limit euro area countri liabil effect gain import eve introduct solvenc ii regim let conclud monetari polici support econom recoveri avoid anoth buildup excess financi imbal tradeoff two object monetari polici stanc ecb remain accommod long need look open mind standard nonstandard monetari polici tool warrant outlook price stabil particular ensur effect monetari polici stanc measur among indic also term structur money market rate remain align govern council assess outlook price stabil financi system howev abl oper differ constel yield current period low interest rate use prepar number action need cut across polici domain mani case take time bear result high polici agenda let highlight three monetari polici cannot substitut first bank capit liquid buffer suffici withstand normalis yield market segment europ achiev within framework bank union start singl supervisori mechan ecb nation supervisori agenc conduct balanc sheet assess provid health check euro area bank adequ peer review draw necessari thirdparti expertis comprehens stress test exercis launch cooper european bank author cover wide rang scenario prior exercis credibl backstop facil need place address potenti capit shortfal bank balanc sheet second regulatori measur aim curtail excess bank leverag mitig durat risk avoid excess matur transform need complement capit adequaci rule leverag ratio net stabl fund ratio nsfr basel iii still review leverag ratio disclos basel committe bank supervis remain commit introduc ratio minimum requir subject review period proper calibr look forward outcom relev work committe third govern lag effort consolid debt deficit keep mind current level yield cannot taken grant yield normalis could take place differenti way across jurisdict renew fragment euro area capit market thank attent wish thank gerhard rünstler christoff kok matthia sydow contribut remark remain sole respons opinion contain herein see stein j c overh credit market origin measur polici respons speech held research symposium feder reserv bank st loui februari see e g de nicolò g et al monetari polici bank risk take imf research depart mimeo see rajan r g financi develop made world riskier proceed feder reserv bank kansa citi august see adrian shin h j money liquid monetari polici feder reserv bank new york staff report one studi use volatil index vix test dynam link monetari polici stock market volatil risk avers find lax monetari polici decreas risk avers stock market nine month effect persist last two year moreov monetari polici shock appear account signific proport variat risk avers see hoerova m bekaert g lo duca m risk uncertainti monetari polici journal monetari econom forthcom anoth studi found similar effect loan low shortterm interest rate soften credit standard household corpor loan especi mortgag soften amplifi securitis activ weak supervis bank capit pronounc polici rate remain low prolong period see maddaloni peydró j l bank risktak securit low interest rate ecb work paper best understood one decompos risk premium price quantiti risk quantiti risk reflect countryspecif econom fiscal situat price risk instead reflect general condit financi market even quantiti risk remain constant increas price risk may lead generalis increas spread see e g manganelli wolswicjk g drive spread euro area govern bond market econom polici reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en