Jürgen Stark: The contribution of monetary and financial statistics to the conduct of monetary policy,24-04-2008,European Central Bank,ECB,3852,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen:It is a great pleasure to contribute to this conference. As the Executive Board member responsible for economics at the ECB, I am acutely aware of the dependence of the analysis underpinning our monetary policy decisions on the quality and breadth of the available statistics. We all recall the famous aphorism – variously attributed to Benjamin Disraeli and Mark Twain – that “there are lies, damned lies and statistics”. I trust that our discussions during this conference will dispel the implied concern about the use of statistical information. After all, without high quality data, on what would analysis rest?In my remarks today, I would like to highlight a number of important statistical requirements for the effective conduct of monetary policy, focusing in particular on the ECB’s monetary analysis. Developing monetary and financial statistics is of course an important responsibility of the ECB itself, so there is an element of “keeping our own house” in order in what I will say. At the same time, I am aware that our need for high quality statistics places a burden on reporting agents – on banks, firms and households – at a time when they already face many other challenges. My contribution today takes as its starting point the primary objective of the ECB and its single monetary policy, namely the maintenance of price stability in the euro area. In pursuit of this objective, the Governing Council follows its monetary policy strategy. One crucial element of the strategy is the ECB’s quantitative definition of price stability. I would like to first reflect briefly on some statistical issues behind our definition of price stability.In 1998, the Governing Council defined price stability as a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Price (or HICP) for the euro area of below 2%. In 2003, the Governing Council confirmed this definition, while clarifying that it aimed for annual HICP inflation “below, but close to, 2%” over the medium term. The HICP was chosen as the index used to define price stability because it is a state-of-the-art measure of the price of households’ monetary consumption expenditures in the euro area. The HICP meets high standards as regards credibility, accuracy and reliability. It is further available in a timely manner and at high frequency. These are crucial conditions a price index has to fulfil to adequately support monetary policy making. Of course, improvement of the HICP along any of these dimensions is welcome, as it will deepen our understanding of price developments and improve the reliability of our definition of price stability. At present, discussions are taking place about the possible extension of the HICP to include Owner Occupied Housing (OOH) costs. This could address one of the short-comings of the HICP, namely the exclusion of price changes for housing costs faced by home-owners. However, including owner-occupied housing expenditures is likely to create measurement problems, as well as posing significant challenges to the timeliness and frequency of the extended HICP series. More importantly, some of the available statistical treatments of owner-occupied housing costs would introduce an asset price or interest rate component into the price index, which could be conceptually problematic for the conduct of monetary policy.An in-depth technical analysis of various approaches to including owner-occupied housing expenditures in the HICP is ongoing. It is still too early for a final assessment. The other crucial part of the strategy is the two pillar framework for identifying and assessing risks to price stability. As you all know, an economic analysis, which assesses the implications of cyclical economic dynamics and shocks on the risks to price stability at short to medium-term horizons, is cross-checked by a monetary analysis, that is focused on the identification of monetary trends that influence price developments over the medium to longer term. Notwithstanding the considerable efforts of those involved in the preparation of Monetary Union, at the start of Stage III in 1999 significant gaps and weaknesses in the statistics then available still existed. As a result, the uncertainty surrounding the assessment of economic and monetary conditions was inevitably higher, with the paucity of statistics compounding the already significant challenges for analysis created by the behavioural changes associated with the regime change constituted by Monetary Union. A concerted effort to collect and construct additional data has significantly improved the statistical situation. Indeed, uncertainty created by the lack of statistical information has dissipated over time. But, at the same time, our experience at the ECB has been that better data in one field does not permit any scaling down of effort in improving data in other areas. On the contrary, in the face of the constant and evolving challenges posed to monetary policy makers, better data simply facilitates the necessary deeper, broader and richer analysis that is always required in order to take decisions that can serve the ECB’s mandate.Ample proof is surely provided by the experience of the past few months. Central banks throughout the world have faced financial turmoil and tensions in the banking sector. Taking monetary policy decisions in this environment demands thorough knowledge and analysis of monetary and financial factors and thus, in turn, an adequate statistical base covering these areas. With these general considerations in mind, I now turn to the ECB’s monetary analysis in greater detail.The prominent role for money in the ECB’s monetary policy strategy derives from the robust empirical relationship between monetary growth and inflation over longer horizons. For a central bank with a mandate to maintain price stability, a close analysis of monetary dynamics is a natural component of a comprehensive framework to analyse inflationary risks. But the question remains of how to employ the relationship between money and prices operationally to guide monetary policy decisions.At the ECB, we have found it possible to extract important, policy-relevant information from the monetary developments in real time. Central to the real time extraction of policy-relevant information from monetary developments is a broad-based approach to monetary analysis. It draws in the first instance on data from the MFI balance sheet but also encompasses a wide variety of other, complementary sources, notably financial statistics such as MFI interest rates, securities issuance data, the Eurosystem bank lending survey, and others. Such a comprehensive and detailed analysis of a broad range of data serves to identify and monitor underlying trends in the monetary data that are relevant for the outlook for price stability and thus for monetary policy decisions. [1]Analysing the channels through which monetary developments influence inflation dynamics is obviously central:Money and credit dynamics play an important role in the evolution of asset prices. [2] Monetary analysis may even help to identify asset price misalignments which – as the Japanese experience in the 1990s attests – can ultimately unwind in ways detrimental to macroeconomic and price stability. Moreover, by providing insight into the portfolio behaviour of money-holders and banks, monetary analysis also enriches our assessment of private sector attitudes to risk, which play an important part in spending and pricing decisions. Furthermore, money and, particularly, credit developments are an important component of the financing conditions facing firms and households, which can have significant implications for consumption and investment decisions that drive the business cycle.Understanding these channels better is at the heart of the agenda to enhance the monetary analysis that is being pursued by Eurosystem staff at the behest of the Governing Council. [3] Four avenues for further research in order to deepen our monetary analysis have been identified.  First , new money demand equations are being developed, which can better explain monetary developments observed over the past few years.  Second , the indicator properties of monetary developments for inflation are being investigated in greater detail, with a focus on the relationship over longer horizons.  Third , the Governing Council has commissioned further work on structural models of the economy that incorporate an important role for monetary and financial variables.  Finally , the Governing Council seeks tools that will aid its cross-checking of the economic and monetary analyses, which is central to the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. Scenarios constructed using structural models are one such approach, while the integrative framework provided by the new euro area accounts is another. Work on these four avenues is ongoing. Our ambitious agenda not only challenges those developing the monetary analysis; it also creates new data demands and statistical requirements. It is to those that I now turn.What are the statistical requirements for enhancing the monetary analysis? First, the availability of long runs of historical data is crucial to the development of appropriate models and tools. There is thus a vital need for long monetary time series that are consistent over time. Meeting this requirement is crucial to developing a better understanding of the leading indicator properties of money for future price developments over longer horizons, and thus for constructing the policy-relevant money-based inflation risk indicators. Moreover, conventional techniques to estimate money demand models rely on long time series, which are often not available for the relevant variables, such as wealth, in the euro area.  Second , a sufficient degree of homogeneity in statistical definitions and concepts used across countries must be achieved. Notwithstanding the considerable efforts made to harmonise the monetary series in the run up to Stage III, significant analytical challenges continue to exist in this respect, given the remaining significant differences in retail financial systems across the euro area.  Third , undertaking the real-time analysis requires the provision of timely data. This includes, when necessary, anonymised information on specific one-off or special transactions that influence the aggregate series. Notwithstanding the medium-term orientation of the monetary analysis, obtaining data – notably for the MFI balance sheet – at a monthly frequency and in a timely fashion is crucial to determine promptly the current underlying trend in monetary and credit expansion. This is because of the well-known “end-point problem” in time series analysis, whereby the latest observations have a very high weight in determining the turning points in the evolution of the series. These turning points in the data are obviously crucial from the policy perspective, since they may lead to turning points in the evolution of the policy stance, as was the case in 2005. Obtaining data with a long lag or only on a quarterly basis implies that the identification of turning points in monetary trends is delayed relative to a situation where monthly data are available promptly. Fourth , a rich data set is needed. Data that have proved useful in developing a rich understanding of monetary developments at the ECB include all aspects of the MFI balance sheet: the components of M3; the counterparts to M3 (notably loans and credit); holdings of M3 deposits by institutional sector; and contributions to M3 deposits by the residency of the issuing bank. In particular, in deepening our understanding of money demand, one promising approach is to distinguish between deposits held by households, non-financial corporations and non-monetary financial institutions. This obviously requires sectoral monetary data. Research undertaken by ECB staff suggests that the responsiveness of money holdings to interest rate or income changes varies widely across sectors, and that some patterns in the aggregate monetary data are better explained by building up from the sectoral level. [4] Fifth ,  consistency of the monetary data with other sources of relevant data is crucial. Maintaining consistency of the monetary data with other data sources can facilitate the cross-checking of the monetary analysis with the economic analysis (e.g. in the context of the euro area accounts). Consistency among various data sets also supports the estimation of structural models that embed monetary and financial frictions within a real economy framework. Improving consistency between the concepts underlying the construction of the monetary data and those used by banks when reporting for accounting and regulatory purposes is also desirable. Not only should this serve to lessen the burden imposed on reporting agents, but it may also help to avoid confusion in the interpretation of the data that can emerge when superficially similar concepts have quite different economic meanings and relevance.Sixth, better primary information on both banks and counterparty sectors is neededThe ECB has taken a number of important initiatives in this regard. The Eurosystem bank lending survey is now a well-established source of information on financing conditions, which complements and enhances the regular analysis of loan and credit flows. Consideration is currently being given to surveys of the corporate and household sectors that would provide a new source of information on financial developments, the cost and availability of credit and portfolio behaviour.Obtaining new primary data on the balance sheets of financial institutions other than banks would be particularly welcome. One feature of the monetary data in recent years has been the rising share of non-monetary financial institutions in money holdings, which would be better understood on the basis of a more comprehensive analysis of the balance sheets of such institutions. More generally, developing more comprehensive balance sheet statistics and, in particular, measures of sectoral wealth are important. Such data can support the refinement of money demand models. Indeed, to make progress with our agenda for enhancing the monetary analysis, statistical work is urgently required to improve the available sectoral wealth data, in particular by providing longer time series that will money holding to be modelled as part of a wider portfolio decision. Seventh, it is important that the statistical framework for the monetary data maintains a high degree of clarity and stability in its definition of concepts, so that central bank staff and policy makers can be precise in their analysis and assessment. Unless we can develop a thorough understanding of the meaning of the data, interpretation will prove impossible. Eighth ,  sufficient flexibility is required to encompass the new instruments and behaviour implied by financial innovation. If necessary, statistics must be promptly and regularly updated in the face of rapid financial innovation  and broader structural change. Of course, a trade-off exists between the stability and flexibility of the statistical framework. Careful management of this trade-off is required in order to make monetary series meaningful for policy purposes in real time. In particular, it is apparent that the statistical framework needs to incorporate new instruments and business models resulting from financial innovation in a manner that maintains consistency between key aggregates (such as M1, M3 or MFI loans) and the policy-relevant underlying economic concepts (such as liquidity, money or financing). Yet if such updating implied almost continuous changes to the definition of key aggregates, a consistent analysis of the data over time would be impossible.Of course, I could go on and on: statisticians and reporting agents know all too well that economists and policy makers’ data requirements are, in principle, inexhaustible. The merits and costs procedure adopted by the Governing Council to assess new statistical regulations reflects the need to cap this insatiable demand. Today I will limit myself to nine requirements, and thereby come to my final point. In designing and constructing monetary and financial statistics for monetary policy purposes, it is crucial that close cooperation and active dialogue is maintained among reporting agents, statisticians at the ECB and the national central banks, users of the statistics and policy makers. This is a point I will take up again in my conclusion. Before coming to that, please allow me to make a number of remarks about the role of monetary analysis in the current period of financial turmoil, drawing on the general requirements I have just listed to identify a number of specific implications for the construction of the monetary statistics that have arisen in this context.Since the emergence of financial tensions in early August 2007, the ECB’s monetary analysis has proved a crucial bulwark for the conduct of monetary policy in the euro area. In particular, the monetary analysis has helped to maintain the necessarily medium-term orientation of monetary policy, at a time when the power of the short-term forces at play threatened to overwhelm it. Moreover, the monetary analysis has served to maintain a focus on nominal developments – that is, the inflation outlook at longer horizons – over which central banks can exert control and for which they ultimately need to take responsibility. The monetary analysis has thus helped the ECB to maintain the orientation of monetary policy towards its primary objective. Moreover, the recent financial market turmoil has re-emphasised the importance and special nature of the banking sector in the transmission of monetary policy and determination of macroeconomic outcomes. Contrary to the attitude taken in some academic critiques of the ECB’s monetary policy framework, developments over the past few months surely demonstrate that banks play a distinctive role in creating “monetary liquidity” that, in turn, is an important determinant of developments in credit and asset markets, in the evolution of the economy and ultimately of price dynamics. Suggestions that securitisation and off-balance sheet activity rendered the analysis of bank balance sheet meaningless have now been revealed as absurd. Attempts to shift activity off-balance sheet proved to be a chimera, as the financial turmoil forced re-intermediation of loans and credit risk onto the MFI balance sheet.In practical terms, analysis of the MFI balance sheet has provided an important “close to real time” insight into the behaviour of financial institutions, at a time when the macroeconomic outlook (including prospects for price stability) and the transmission of monetary policy were seen to be potentially strongly influenced by the behaviour of banks and the possibility of a “credit crunch”. In particular, a close analysis of the monetary data provided evidence that the flow of bank loans to households and corporations was not significantly impaired by the money market tensions observed in the second half of 2007 and early 2008, thereby tempering the messages coming from other data sources, such as the Eurosystem bank lending survey and MFI interest rate statistics. This analysis has proved to be an important input into the assessment of financing conditions and thus in the analysis of cyclical dynamics of the economy, under both baseline and variant scenarios.As this brief description illustrates, the financial turmoil episode has demonstrated the importance of a number of the general principles governing monetary analysis with implications for our statistical requirements in this area. Adopting a broad-based approach to analysis has proved fundamental. By implication, integrating the analysis of monetary data with information from a wide variety of sources – in particular, a wide set of financial statistics for both prices and quantities and the bank lending survey – has been crucial. Moreover, to have impact on policy discussion, conclusions drawn from analysis of the monetary and credit data regarding loan supply conditions must be available in close to real time, supporting the need for timely monthly reporting of monetary statistics.Of course, in current challenging circumstances, it remains too early to judge the success of our monetary analysis and, by implication, the quality of the information derived from the existing body of monetary statistics. Nonetheless, three points can and should be made on the basis of our experience since last August: First , the close analysis of the monetary data derived from the MFI balance sheet has proved crucial in understanding the nature of the turmoil and the challenges it poses for monetary policy. It has both served to maintain a focus on the longer-term inflationary trends that are fundamental to effective monetary policy making, while also deepening our understanding of financial conditions and their cyclical implications.  Second , the turmoil has identified a number of lacunae in the statistical basis for the analysis – for example, regarding the extent of credit risk transfer from bank balance sheets – that need to be addressed.  Third , from the outset of Monetary Union, the ECB has maintained both the necessary staff expertise and the required statistical base for a thorough monetary analysis. Maintaining such continuity is required if the monetary analysis is to be insightful when – as is certainly the case now – monetary and financial factors are at the heart of the policy discussion. These are important lessons to be drawn from the ECB experience.Sceptics have often questioned the information content of monetary data and thus criticised the role played by monetary analysis in the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. Often such critiques are based on only a casual knowledge of the euro area data. Based on the ECB experience, the ability to extract policy-relevant information from the monetary data depends on two elements: First, high quality data must be available. Second, high quality analysis of the data is required on an ongoing basis. It is apparent that a self-reinforcing virtuous cycle can be created, whereby better data serve better analysis, which in turn identifies necessary improvements to the data. The continuous nature of the process underpinning this virtuous cycle is crucial: once halted, even a successful monetary analysis may prove hard to restart. Maintaining continuous improvement in the data and the analysis is central to our agenda to “enhance the monetary analysis”.By the same token, the potential for a destructive vicious cycle also exists. Poor quality data breeds poor analysis. Attempts to improve monetary statistics thus yield lower returns, and investment in such improvements diminishes. The resulting deterioration in the quality of the data in turn leads to a further deterioration in the impact of the analysis, thereby feeding the vicious spiral.Based on the Anglo-Saxon experience with financial innovation, many critics argue that monetary data has little or no information content and should be discarded from monetary policy considerations. What I would like to emphasise today is that there is nothing necessary about this conclusion. It is neither a theoretical necessity nor an empirical inevitability caused by some irresistible exogenous force. Rather, the information content of monetary statistics and the value of monetary analysis are questions of practice: they are determined endogenously, with greater efforts on the analytical and statistical side leading to more meaningful results and more policy-relevant conclusions.In close collaboration with statisticians and reporting agents, within the Eurosystem we have and are making this investment in enhancing the monetary analysis. This investment has paid important dividends in guiding monetary policy decisions – no more so than in the current challenging conditions of financial turmoil. Looking forward, we seek your help in maintaining the momentum of the virtuous cycle of continuous improvement in monetary analysis, which will support monetary policy decisions from which we all benefit. By enhancing its monetary analysis through both statistical and analytical advances, the ECB is well prepared to meet current and future challenges.[1] See “Monetary analysis in real time”, ECB Monthly Bulletin October 2004 and B. Fischer, et al. (2008) “Money and monetary policy: The ECB experience 1999-2006” in eds. A. Beyer and L. Reichlin The role of money – Money and monetary policy in the twenty-first century (ECB). [2] See R. Adalid and C. Detken (2007) “Liquidity shocks and asset price boom/bust cycles”, ECB working paper no. 732.[3] See J. Stark “Enhancing the monetary analysis”, speech at the conference “The ECB and its watchers IX”, Frankfurt 7 September 2007 ( http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2007/html/sp070907_1.en.html ).[4] See J. von Landesberger (2007), “Sectoral money demand models for the euro area based on a common set of determinants”, ECB working paper no. 741.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur contribut confer execut board member respons econom ecb acut awar depend analysi underpin monetari polici decis qualiti breadth avail statist recal famous aphor various attribut benjamin disra mark twain lie damn lie statist trust discuss confer dispel impli concern use statist inform without high qualiti data would analysi rest remark today would like highlight number import statist requir effect conduct monetari polici focus particular ecb monetari analysi develop monetari financi statist cours import respons ecb element keep hous order say time awar need high qualiti statist place burden report agent bank firm household time alreadi face mani challeng contribut today take start point primari object ecb singl monetari polici name mainten price stabil euro area pursuit object govern council follow monetari polici strategi one crucial element strategi ecb quantit definit price stabil would like first reflect briefli statist issu behind definit price stabil govern council defin price stabil yearonyear increas harmonis index consum price hicp euro area govern council confirm definit clarifi aim annual hicp inflat close medium term hicp chosen index use defin price stabil stateoftheart measur price household monetari consumpt expenditur euro area hicp meet high standard regard credibl accuraci reliabl avail time manner high frequenc crucial condit price index fulfil adequ support monetari polici make cours improv hicp along dimens welcom deepen understand price develop improv reliabl definit price stabil present discuss take place possibl extens hicp includ owner occupi hous ooh cost could address one shortcom hicp name exclus price chang hous cost face homeown howev includ owneroccupi hous expenditur like creat measur problem well pose signific challeng timeli frequenc extend hicp seri import avail statist treatment owneroccupi hous cost would introduc asset price interest rate compon price index could conceptu problemat conduct monetari polici indepth technic analysi various approach includ owneroccupi hous expenditur hicp ongo still earli final assess crucial part strategi two pillar framework identifi assess risk price stabil know econom analysi assess implic cyclic econom dynam shock risk price stabil short mediumterm horizon crosscheck monetari analysi focus identif monetari trend influenc price develop medium longer term notwithstand consider effort involv prepar monetari union start stage iii signific gap weak statist avail still exist result uncertainti surround assess econom monetari condit inevit higher pauciti statist compound alreadi signific challeng analysi creat behaviour chang associ regim chang constitut monetari union concert effort collect construct addit data signific improv statist situat inde uncertainti creat lack statist inform dissip time time experi ecb better data one field permit scale effort improv data area contrari face constant evolv challeng pose monetari polici maker better data simpli facilit necessari deeper broader richer analysi alway requir order take decis serv ecb mandat ampl proof sure provid experi past month central bank throughout world face financi turmoil tension bank sector take monetari polici decis environ demand thorough knowledg analysi monetari financi factor thus turn adequ statist base cover area general consider mind turn ecb monetari analysi greater detail promin role money ecb monetari polici strategi deriv robust empir relationship monetari growth inflat longer horizon central bank mandat maintain price stabil close analysi monetari dynam natur compon comprehens framework analys inflationari risk question remain employ relationship money price oper guid monetari polici decis ecb found possibl extract import policyrelev inform monetari develop real time central real time extract policyrelev inform monetari develop broadbas approach monetari analysi draw first instanc data mfi balanc sheet also encompass wide varieti complementari sourc notabl financi statist mfi interest rate secur issuanc data eurosystem bank lend survey other comprehens detail analysi broad rang data serv identifi monitor under trend monetari data relev outlook price stabil thus monetari polici decis analys channel monetari develop influenc inflat dynam obvious central money credit dynam play import role evolut asset price monetari analysi may even help identifi asset price misalign japanes experi attest ultim unwind way detriment macroeconom price stabil moreov provid insight portfolio behaviour moneyhold bank monetari analysi also enrich assess privat sector attitud risk play import part spend price decis furthermor money particular credit develop import compon financ condit face firm household signific implic consumpt invest decis drive busi cycl understand channel better heart agenda enhanc monetari analysi pursu eurosystem staff behest govern council four avenu research order deepen monetari analysi identifi first new money demand equat develop better explain monetari develop observ past year second indic properti monetari develop inflat investig greater detail focus relationship longer horizon third govern council commiss work structur model economi incorpor import role monetari financi variabl final govern council seek tool aid crosscheck econom monetari analys central ecb monetari polici strategi scenario construct use structur model one approach integr framework provid new euro area account anoth work four avenu ongo ambiti agenda challeng develop monetari analysi also creat new data demand statist requir turn statist requir enhanc monetari analysi first avail long run histor data crucial develop appropri model tool thus vital need long monetari time seri consist time meet requir crucial develop better understand lead indic properti money futur price develop longer horizon thus construct policyrelev moneybas inflat risk indic moreov convent techniqu estim money demand model reli long time seri often avail relev variabl wealth euro area second suffici degre homogen statist definit concept use across countri must achiev notwithstand consider effort made harmonis monetari seri run stage iii signific analyt challeng continu exist respect given remain signific differ retail financi system across euro area third undertak realtim analysi requir provis time data includ necessari anonymis inform specif oneoff special transact influenc aggreg seri notwithstand mediumterm orient monetari analysi obtain data notabl mfi balanc sheet month frequenc time fashion crucial determin prompt current under trend monetari credit expans wellknown endpoint problem time seri analysi wherebi latest observ high weight determin turn point evolut seri turn point data obvious crucial polici perspect sinc may lead turn point evolut polici stanc case obtain data long lag quarter basi impli identif turn point monetari trend delay relat situat month data avail prompt fourth rich data set need data prove use develop rich understand monetari develop ecb includ aspect mfi balanc sheet compon m counterpart m notabl loan credit hold m deposit institut sector contribut m deposit resid issu bank particular deepen understand money demand one promis approach distinguish deposit held household nonfinanci corpor nonmonetari financi institut obvious requir sector monetari data research undertaken ecb staff suggest respons money hold interest rate incom chang vari wide across sector pattern aggreg monetari data better explain build sector level fifth consist monetari data sourc relev data crucial maintain consist monetari data data sourc facilit crosscheck monetari analysi econom analysi e g context euro area account consist among various data set also support estim structur model emb monetari financi friction within real economi framework improv consist concept under construct monetari data use bank report account regulatori purpos also desir serv lessen burden impos report agent may also help avoid confus interpret data emerg superfici similar concept quit differ econom mean relev sixth better primari inform bank counterparti sector neededth ecb taken number import initi regard eurosystem bank lend survey wellestablish sourc inform financ condit complement enhanc regular analysi loan credit flow consider current given survey corpor household sector would provid new sourc inform financi develop cost avail credit portfolio behaviour obtain new primari data balanc sheet financi institut bank would particular welcom one featur monetari data recent year rise share nonmonetari financi institut money hold would better understood basi comprehens analysi balanc sheet institut general develop comprehens balanc sheet statist particular measur sector wealth import data support refin money demand model inde make progress agenda enhanc monetari analysi statist work urgent requir improv avail sector wealth data particular provid longer time seri money hold model part wider portfolio decis seventh import statist framework monetari data maintain high degre clariti stabil definit concept central bank staff polici maker precis analysi assess unless develop thorough understand mean data interpret prove imposs eighth suffici flexibl requir encompass new instrument behaviour impli financi innov necessari statist must prompt regular updat face rapid financi innov broader structur chang cours tradeoff exist stabil flexibl statist framework care manag tradeoff requir order make monetari seri meaning polici purpos real time particular appar statist framework need incorpor new instrument busi model result financi innov manner maintain consist key aggreg m m mfi loan policyrelev under econom concept liquid money financ yet updat impli almost continu chang definit key aggreg consist analysi data time would imposs cours could go statistician report agent know well economist polici maker data requir principl inexhaust merit cost procedur adopt govern council assess new statist regul reflect need cap insati demand today limit nine requir therebi come final point design construct monetari financi statist monetari polici purpos crucial close cooper activ dialogu maintain among report agent statistician ecb nation central bank user statist polici maker point take conclus come pleas allow make number remark role monetari analysi current period financi turmoil draw general requir list identifi number specif implic construct monetari statist arisen context sinc emerg financi tension earli august ecb monetari analysi prove crucial bulwark conduct monetari polici euro area particular monetari analysi help maintain necessarili mediumterm orient monetari polici time power shortterm forc play threaten overwhelm moreov monetari analysi serv maintain focus nomin develop inflat outlook longer horizon central bank exert control ultim need take respons monetari analysi thus help ecb maintain orient monetari polici toward primari object moreov recent financi market turmoil reemphasis import special natur bank sector transmiss monetari polici determin macroeconom outcom contrari attitud taken academ critiqu ecb monetari polici framework develop past month sure demonstr bank play distinct role creat monetari liquid turn import determin develop credit asset market evolut economi ultim price dynam suggest securitis offbal sheet activ render analysi bank balanc sheet meaningless reveal absurd attempt shift activ offbal sheet prove chimera financi turmoil forc reintermedi loan credit risk onto mfi balanc sheet practic term analysi mfi balanc sheet provid import close real time insight behaviour financi institut time macroeconom outlook includ prospect price stabil transmiss monetari polici seen potenti strong influenc behaviour bank possibl credit crunch particular close analysi monetari data provid evid flow bank loan household corpor signific impair money market tension observ second half earli therebi temper messag come data sourc eurosystem bank lend survey mfi interest rate statist analysi prove import input assess financ condit thus analysi cyclic dynam economi baselin variant scenario brief descript illustr financi turmoil episod demonstr import number general principl govern monetari analysi implic statist requir area adopt broadbas approach analysi prove fundament implic integr analysi monetari data inform wide varieti sourc particular wide set financi statist price quantiti bank lend survey crucial moreov impact polici discuss conclus drawn analysi monetari credit data regard loan suppli condit must avail close real time support need time month report monetari statist cours current challeng circumst remain earli judg success monetari analysi implic qualiti inform deriv exist bodi monetari statist nonetheless three point made basi experi sinc last august first close analysi monetari data deriv mfi balanc sheet prove crucial understand natur turmoil challeng pose monetari polici serv maintain focus longerterm inflationari trend fundament effect monetari polici make also deepen understand financi condit cyclic implic second turmoil identifi number lacuna statist basi analysi exampl regard extent credit risk transfer bank balanc sheet need address third outset monetari union ecb maintain necessari staff expertis requir statist base thorough monetari analysi maintain continu requir monetari analysi insight certain case monetari financi factor heart polici discuss import lesson drawn ecb experi sceptic often question inform content monetari data thus criticis role play monetari analysi ecb monetari polici strategi often critiqu base casual knowledg euro area data base ecb experi abil extract policyrelev inform monetari data depend two element first high qualiti data must avail second high qualiti analysi data requir ongo basi appar selfreinforc virtuous cycl creat wherebi better data serv better analysi turn identifi necessari improv data continu natur process underpin virtuous cycl crucial halt even success monetari analysi may prove hard restart maintain continu improv data analysi central agenda enhanc monetari analysi token potenti destruct vicious cycl also exist poor qualiti data breed poor analysi attempt improv monetari statist thus yield lower return invest improv diminish result deterior qualiti data turn lead deterior impact analysi therebi feed vicious spiral base anglosaxon experi financi innov mani critic argu monetari data littl inform content discard monetari polici consider would like emphasis today noth necessari conclus neither theoret necess empir inevit caus irresist exogen forc rather inform content monetari statist valu monetari analysi question practic determin endogen greater effort analyt statist side lead meaning result policyrelev conclus close collabor statistician report agent within eurosystem make invest enhanc monetari analysi invest paid import dividend guid monetari polici decis current challeng condit financi turmoil look forward seek help maintain momentum virtuous cycl continu improv monetari analysi support monetari polici decis benefit enhanc monetari analysi statist analyt advanc ecb well prepar meet current futur challeng see monetari analysi real time ecb month bulletin octob b fischer et al money monetari polici ecb experi ed beyer l reichlin role money money monetari polici twentyfirst centuri ecb see r adalid c detken liquid shock asset price boombust cycl ecb work paper see j stark enhanc monetari analysi speech confer ecb watcher ix frankfurt septemb http www ecb europa eupresskeyd htmlsp _ en html see j von landesberg sector money demand model euro area base common set determin ecb work paper reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en