"Jean-Claude Trichet: Keynote address at the ""€ conference Slovenia""",15-01-2007,European Central Bank,ECB,1732,"<p>Ladies and Gentlemen,It is a great pleasure to talk to you here, in Ljubljana at a conference celebrating the adoption of the euro on the very first day, when the euro is the single currency in circulation in Slovenia. Let me first and foremost congratulate to all parties involved in the successful cash changeover two weeks ago, that went very smooth and without any problems. Not only did Slovenia perform exceptionally well in its convergence process to the euro area, but the last bit, the cash changeover was also exemplary so far.It is amazing to recall that Slovenia had three currencies over a period of just 15 years (Dinar, tolar and euro) - even disregarding the coupons or vouchers that were in circulation for about 1 year prior to the introduction of the tolar. To me this is clearly a sign that economic developments can happen very fast if a country is determined to make rapid progress. After all, who would have thought 10 or 15 years ago that Slovenia would today celebrate the adoption of the euro?It has been exactly five years since the first – and until two weeks ago the last – euro area enlargement, when Greece joined the original eleven euro area members. Let me say that I am delighted that after half a decade we can today welcome again a new country to the euro area and expand the number of participating countries from 12 to 13. Measured in terms of population and economic activity, the euro area is one of the largest economies in the world. The euro serves as single currency to more than 300 million citizens; today around 317 million people including the Slovene population of two million, and the euro area GDP amounts to just above 8000 billion euros.Slovenia is the first of the ten countries that joined the EU in 2004 that managed to comply with the criteria to join the single currency, thus allowing it to introduce the euro as the national currency. After all it is only two and a half years after Slovenia joined the EU and today we already have the pleasure to welcome Slovenia also in the euro area. The adoption of the euro that we are celebrating today is a result of the macroeconomic policies that the authorities of Slovenia have pursued and the macroeconomic performance they have achieved. As a result, Slovenia has made significant progress in nominal and real convergence over recent years, owing to a successful policy-mix, in particular well-managed monetary and exchange rate policies, sound fiscal policy and a range of structural reforms. Inflation came down from 8.9% in 2001 to 2.5% in 2006. Accordingly, both short-term and long-term interest rates fell considerably and are now in line with the euro area average. While the short-term interest rate differential vis-à-vis the euro area persisted until recently, reflecting the monetary policy strategy pursued by Banka Slovenije, long-term interest rates approached levels close to the euro area already in 2004, reflecting market confidence in general economic and fiscal developments in Slovenia and the credibility of the monetary and exchange rate policy. The process of nominal convergence has been accompanied by robust economic growth. Real GDP growth in Slovenia has been well above the euro area in the recent years. Growth has been underpinned by domestic demand as well as strong exports, which reflects the increased integration of Slovenia with the EU and the euro area. In this respect, foreign direct investment (FDI) has also been an important factor. Nevertheless, we should bear in mind that Slovenia has a good opportunity to catch up further with the euro area average income. Slovenia’s GDP per capita (in PPP terms) progressed from 60 % of the euro area average in 1995 to 76 % in 2005: this is a significant improvement, which also still gives room for catching up towards the EU average. High economic growth and advances in income per capita levels clearly indicate the progress made in real convergence. Indeed, nominal and real convergence are interdependent processes and nominal convergence provides the necessary environment for lasting real convergence. At the same time, real convergence also requires continued efforts to remove rigidities in the labour and goods markets, as well as continued efforts to reform the financial system.It is remarkable that Slovenia has achieved its progress in nominal and real convergence without experiencing major imbalances; in particular the Slovenian current account balance has remained contained over quite a long period of time. The fiscal balance (the deficit-to-GDP ratio) has been on a broadly improving trend since 2000 (even though further consolidation is required for Slovenia to comply with the medium-term objective quantified in the convergence programme). Looking at the financial side, Slovenia is experiencing a substantial process of financial deepening, which has been reflected in robust credit activity. In this context let me say that the process of financial deepening, which is taking place in almost all countries that joined the EU in 2004 and 2007 will also support economic development as it is expected to promote more efficient investment. However, this process does require careful monitoring and strong prudential supervision, in particular if financial deepening takes place at a very rapid pace. Another element of Slovenia’s successful convergence experience is its participation in the Exchange Rate Mechanism II (ERM II). Slovenia’s participation in the Mechanism has been smooth. The parity at which Slovenia entered the ERM II was set at the market rate at the time of ERM II entry and the tolar-euro exchange rate remained very close to the parity for the entire period of ERM II participation. As a consequence, the EU Council decided that the central parity should also become the final conversion rate of the tolar to the euro.Let me use this opportunity to stress again that participation in ERM II is a very important step on the road to the euro. A smooth participation in ERM II is testimony for the sustainability of the necessary convergence process prior the adoption of the euro. ERM II participation ties the exchange rate and hence acts as a “testing phase” of the irrevocably exchange rate fixation. In this respect, the mechanism provides flexibility with a 15% band around the parity and the possibility of mutually agreed realignments of the parity. Let me also recall that while two years of participation are the minimum period required, there are no limits on the maximum length of the participation. This in turn allows countries which have not yet achieved a sufficient level of sustainable convergence with regard to all criteria to adequately prepare for the single currency while already enjoying the benefits of a stable exchange rate anchor. Let me at this point also mention that currently there are seven countries participating in the ERM II (Denmark since 1979 [ERM I], Estonia and Lithuania that joined ERM II in 2004, Cyprus, Malta, Latvia and Slovakia that joined in 2005). For these countries, the ERM II experience has been and remains a useful test to check whether their economies can work smoothly under conditions of stable exchange rates or whether further efforts are needed to make the convergence process sustainable. Finally, let me say that the ECB has established excellent working relations with Banka Slovenije over the last couple of years. Already prior to EU accession, the Banka Slovenije was invited to participate in selected activities of the European System of Central Banks and the ECB at various levels. Since 2004, the colleagues from Banka Slovenije have attended numerous working groups and committees and thus contributed to our work. Governor Mitja Gaspari has been a member of the General Council of the ECB since May 2004. Since August 2006 he attended the meetings of the Governing Council as an Observer, and became official member of this decision-making body for monetary policy in the euro area on 1 January 2007. Once the EU Council had taken the decision to abrogate the derogation of Slovenia, thus paving the way for the introduction of the euro, the ECB and Banka Slovenije, together with the National Changeover Board, the European Commission and national and international authorities cooperated closely in many ways for preparing the adoption of the euro. As a result today we can celebrate the successful cash changeover. I am sure that the good working relationship between the Banka Slovenije and the ECB will also continue in the future and will even become closer as the Banka Slovenije is now a fully integrated part of the Eurosystem. As you may know, close cooperation between the national central banks of the Eurosystem, the ESCB and the ECB is essential for our work and crucial to ensure the success of the single monetary policy in the euro area.From now on Slovenia will enjoy the general benefits of participation in the single currency area, such as no exchange rate risks with respect to its most important trade partners and price transparency, which will promote trade. It will also benefit from the stability oriented policy of the ECB, which will help anchor inflation expectations. Furthermore, as Slovenia is a small open economy, adopting the euro provides considerable protection against international financial disturbances, which often have a disproportional effect on smaller economies. All this will translate into strong growth and job creation over time. Nevertheless, in order to reap the benefits of participation in the single currency area to the greatest extent possible, Slovenia (as all countries that are members of the euro area) needs to ensure appropriate national policies, in particular fiscal and structural policies, as well as appropriate wage developments. This will, in turn, help to maintain price stability in Slovenia and to preserve its competitiveness and growth. Certainly, in the first period of the changeover there have been concerns arising related to price rises in certain parts of the economy, especially in the services sector. This was dealt with by the Slovene authorities and consumer associations, by means of the long dual pricing period and price monitoring teams, to name a few. Let me stress that the citizens of Slovenia play a very important role here: the consumers in a market economy have a major influence on price formation. Consumers will be a major force in preventing any unjustified price increases. Ladies and gentlemen, let me again congratulate to all the achievements of the process of euro adoption in Slovenia and give my warm welcome to the new member in the family of the Eurosystem. Bravo, Slovenija! Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",ladi gentlemen great pleasur talk ljubljana confer celebr adopt euro first day euro singl currenc circul slovenia let first foremost congratul parti involv success cash changeov two week ago went smooth without problem slovenia perform except well converg process euro area last bit cash changeov also exemplari far amaz recal slovenia three currenc period year dinar tolar euro even disregard coupon voucher circul year prior introduct tolar clear sign econom develop happen fast countri determin make rapid progress would thought year ago slovenia would today celebr adopt euro exact five year sinc first two week ago last euro area enlarg greec join origin eleven euro area member let say delight half decad today welcom new countri euro area expand number particip countri measur term popul econom activ euro area one largest economi world euro serv singl currenc million citizen today around million peopl includ sloven popul two million euro area gdp amount billion euro slovenia first ten countri join eu manag compli criteria join singl currenc thus allow introduc euro nation currenc two half year slovenia join eu today alreadi pleasur welcom slovenia also euro area adopt euro celebr today result macroeconom polici author slovenia pursu macroeconom perform achiev result slovenia made signific progress nomin real converg recent year owe success policymix particular wellmanag monetari exchang rate polici sound fiscal polici rang structur reform inflat came accord shortterm longterm interest rate fell consider line euro area averag shortterm interest rate differenti visàvi euro area persist recent reflect monetari polici strategi pursu banka slovenij longterm interest rate approach level close euro area alreadi reflect market confid general econom fiscal develop slovenia credibl monetari exchang rate polici process nomin converg accompani robust econom growth real gdp growth slovenia well euro area recent year growth underpin domest demand well strong export reflect increas integr slovenia eu euro area respect foreign direct invest fdi also import factor nevertheless bear mind slovenia good opportun catch euro area averag incom slovenia gdp per capita ppp term progress euro area averag signific improv also still give room catch toward eu averag high econom growth advanc incom per capita level clear indic progress made real converg inde nomin real converg interdepend process nomin converg provid necessari environ last real converg time real converg also requir continu effort remov rigid labour good market well continu effort reform financi system remark slovenia achiev progress nomin real converg without experienc major imbal particular slovenian current account balanc remain contain quit long period time fiscal balanc deficittogdp ratio broad improv trend sinc even though consolid requir slovenia compli mediumterm object quantifi converg programm look financi side slovenia experienc substanti process financi deepen reflect robust credit activ context let say process financi deepen take place almost countri join eu also support econom develop expect promot effici invest howev process requir care monitor strong prudenti supervis particular financi deepen take place rapid pace anoth element slovenia success converg experi particip exchang rate mechan ii erm ii slovenia particip mechan smooth pariti slovenia enter erm ii set market rate time erm ii entri tolareuro exchang rate remain close pariti entir period erm ii particip consequ eu council decid central pariti also becom final convers rate tolar euro let use opportun stress particip erm ii import step road euro smooth particip erm ii testimoni sustain necessari converg process prior adopt euro erm ii particip tie exchang rate henc act test phase irrevoc exchang rate fixat respect mechan provid flexibl band around pariti possibl mutual agre realign pariti let also recal two year particip minimum period requir limit maximum length particip turn allow countri yet achiev suffici level sustain converg regard criteria adequ prepar singl currenc alreadi enjoy benefit stabl exchang rate anchor let point also mention current seven countri particip erm ii denmark sinc erm estonia lithuania join erm ii cyprus malta latvia slovakia join countri erm ii experi remain use test check whether economi work smooth condit stabl exchang rate whether effort need make converg process sustain final let say ecb establish excel work relat banka slovenij last coupl year alreadi prior eu access banka slovenij invit particip select activ european system central bank ecb various level sinc colleagu banka slovenij attend numer work group committe thus contribut work governor mitja gaspari member general council ecb sinc may sinc august attend meet govern council observ becam offici member decisionmak bodi monetari polici euro area januari eu council taken decis abrog derog slovenia thus pave way introduct euro ecb banka slovenij togeth nation changeov board european commiss nation intern author cooper close mani way prepar adopt euro result today celebr success cash changeov sure good work relationship banka slovenij ecb also continu futur even becom closer banka slovenij fulli integr part eurosystem may know close cooper nation central bank eurosystem escb ecb essenti work crucial ensur success singl monetari polici euro area slovenia enjoy general benefit particip singl currenc area exchang rate risk respect import trade partner price transpar promot trade also benefit stabil orient polici ecb help anchor inflat expect furthermor slovenia small open economi adopt euro provid consider protect intern financi disturb often disproport effect smaller economi translat strong growth job creation time nevertheless order reap benefit particip singl currenc area greatest extent possibl slovenia countri member euro area need ensur appropri nation polici particular fiscal structur polici well appropri wage develop turn help maintain price stabil slovenia preserv competit growth certain first period changeov concern aris relat price rise certain part economi especi servic sector dealt sloven author consum associ mean long dual price period price monitor team name let stress citizen slovenia play import role consum market economi major influenc price format consum major forc prevent unjustifi price increas ladi gentlemen let congratul achiev process euro adopt slovenia give warm welcom new member famili eurosystem bravo slovenija reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en