Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament,09-10-2012,European Central Bank,ECB,1956,"<p>Madam Chair,Honourable members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs,It is a pleasure to be back here in Parliament and in front of your Committee for our regular exchange of views. As you know, the European Central Bank (ECB) has recently taken important decisions to address severe distortions in government bond markets. The ECB stands ready to undertake, under appropriate conditions, what we have called outright monetary transactions (OMTs). These provide a fully effective backstop to avoid destructive scenarios that might threaten price stability in the euro area. Our OMT announcements have helped to support financial market confidence. The ECB’s actions can help to build a bridge. But the bridge must have a clear destination.Reaching that destination involves three processes: first, full implementation of fiscal consolidation and structural reforms to enhance competitiveness; second, full implementation of financial sector reform; and third, completion of a genuine economic and monetary union. The establishment of a Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) is a key step in these processes. Today, I will review economic and monetary developments since July. I will then explain in some detail the rationale and modalities of the OMTs. I will end by sharing my views on one of the four building blocks of a genuine economic and monetary union, namely the financial market union.Let me start with the economy. Since our last meeting, the ECB has left its key interest rates unchanged: the main refinancing rate stands at 0.75%; and the deposit rate at 0%; the marginal lending facility at 1.50%;. Economic activity contracted in the second quarter of 2012. Looking ahead, we expect weak economic activity in the near term and only a very gradual recovery after that. The risks to this outlook are on the downside, mainly related to the tensions in several euro area financial markets.Average inflation in the euro area stood at 2.7% in September, reflecting indirect taxes and high energy prices. It should decline to below 2% in the course of 2013. Underlying price pressures should remain moderate given modest economic growth and well-anchored long-term inflation expectations. Risks to the outlook for price developments are broadly balanced.Our monetary analysis paints a picture consistent with price stability. In particular, the underlying pace of monetary expansion remains subdued. Loan dynamics are also subdued as a result of weak demand for credit but also restrictions on the supply of credit in some euro area countries. Let me now explain the decision announced by the ECB’s Governing Council in September on outright monetary transactions.The impact on financial and monetary conditions of past reductions in key ECB interest rates differed considerably within the euro area. For example, in some countries, following cuts in key ECB interest rates, the rates charged by the banking system for credit to the real economy have declined only a little, if at all. In other countries, ECB rate cuts have been fully passed through.One reason for this difference is that the cost of bank credit to firms is inevitably linked to the cost of market funding for the banks themselves. If there are fears about potential destructive scenarios, the cost of funding for banks can be affected asymmetrically across the euro area. This means that two firms that are otherwise identical and have the same creditworthiness have benefited to a different extent from past cuts in key ECB interest rates, merely because they are located in different countries. It is that distortion in financing costs that hinders the smooth functioning of credit markets and the transmission of monetary policy. It is that distortion which keeps some countries in what I have previously described as a ‘bad equilibrium’. And it is that distortion which falls clearly within our mandate to address.To counter the impairment of monetary policy transmission and to preserve the singleness of the ECB’s monetary policy, the Governing Council decided to undertake outright monetary transactions. OMT interventions in government bond markets provide a fully effective backstop to avoid destructive scenarios that might threaten price stability in the euro area. The aim is to ensure that the ECB’s monetary policy stance is transmitted more evenly to the real economy across euro area. The ECB will conduct OMTs if and as long as countries comply with strict and effective conditions attached to an appropriate programme via the European Financial Stability Facility and the European Stability Mechanism. Conditionality preserves the primacy of our price stability mandate and ensures that OMTs will not compensate for a lack of fiscal consolidation. Conditionality in particular preserves the incentives for governments to continue with economic and fiscal adjustments. And only if conditionality is fulfilled will the OMTs be successful in moving an economy towards what we might call a ‘good equilibrium’. OMTs are ex-ante unlimited but, as I have just explained, they are not unconditional. Exit from OMTs would take place once their objectives have been achieved or when there is a failure to comply with a programme. OMTs would not take place while a given programme is under review and they would resume after the review period once programme compliance has been assured.Consistent with the Treaty prohibition of monetary financing, the ECB will only conduct transactions on secondary markets, buying from investors and not from governments. Purchases will focus in particular on government bonds with remaining maturities of between one and three years. This is in line with the traditional focus of central bank monetary operations.The ECB will accept the same treatment as private or other creditors with respect to bonds purchased in the context of OMTs. And the ECB will be fully transparent on its OMTs. We will report weekly on total portfolio holdings, and monthly on the average duration of our holdings and the breakdown by country. Let me now turn to the other topic you have chosen for today’s exchange of views, namely the financial market union.The ECB welcomes the European Commission’s proposal for a Single Supervisory Mechanism, which is very much in line with the statement of the euro area summit of 29 June 2012. We are looking forward to working closely with the European Parliament in this field. I am confident that the excellent cooperation we have established so far will continue with matters of financial supervision.Let me here focus on three issues that are key to setting the stage for the new supervisory framework in the euro area: first, the principle of separation between monetary policy and financial supervision; second, the possible participation of non-euro area Member States in the SSM; and third, the accountability framework.On the first issue of the separation of monetary and supervisory functions, we are not entering uncharted territory. Many central banks around the world – including a large majority of the national central banks in the Eurosystem – combine monetary and supervisory functions.Proper arrangements to prevent monetary policy being inappropriately affected by the supervisory role have been devised in several countries. I am confident that we can establish suitable arrangements in the euro area, drawing in part on their experiences.The Commission’s proposal provides a solid basis for achieving that goal. By having the Supervisory Board carry out all regular supervisory activities performed directly by the ECB, we will go a long way towards avoiding possible conflicts of interest between the two functions. In addition, we are examining internal procedures that would separate the relevant work-streams supporting the two functions. The second key issue for the supervisory framework is the possibility of non-euro area Member States participating in the SSM. Let us first take a step back and remind ourselves that the key reason why we are building the financial market union is because of what is happening in the euro area. We are building it to break the vicious circle between sovereigns and banks, the manifestations of which are much more acute and disruptive in a monetary union. That is why we need the SSM in the single currency area. At the same time, it is clear that we have to create the financial market union while sustaining – and even strengthening – the single market. Both the single currency and the single market are key pillars of growth and prosperity in Europe. Both should be maintained – indeed, both should be enhanced. The ECB welcomes the possibility of involvement of non-euro area Member States in the SSM. The participation of additional Member States would provide an even stronger boost to the completion of the single market.That being said, for an entity such as the ECB, whose key legal powers and key decision-making fora are limited to the euro area, imposing obligations on – and granting corresponding rights to – non-euro area Member States raises a number of legal issues. Our legal services – together with those of the Commission and the European Council – are examining closely the possible modalities of participation of non-euro area Member States within the legal constraints of our Statute. The third key issue for the supervisory framework is one that I suspect is particularly close to your hearts: how the ECB will be accountable for its supervisory actions to the citizens of Europe and their elected representatives. While the independence of the supervisory function is important, so is its accountability. They are, after all, two sides of the same coin.Given the nature of the tasks of supervision and the need for operational cooperation with other authorities – notably where fiscal costs are concerned – separate and robust mechanisms of accountability have to be in place to legitimise the high degree of independence. The Commission proposal foresees, in particular, that the SSM will be accountable to the European Parliament and the European Council.Questions have been raised about the timeline for when we should begin our supervisory tasks. Irrespective of the precise schedule for the performance of supervisory tasks, I believe that it is very important that the Council Regulation enters into force as envisaged on 1 January 2013. This would allow us to start the preparatory work as swiftly as possible. I have discussed the main aspects of the SSM. But the financial market union would be incomplete without commensurate progress towards a common resolution regime. The lack of such a regime has increased the cost of bank failures for taxpayers. It has also complicated the handling of bank failures, especially in cross-border cases. A common resolution regime – with an independent European resolution authority at its centre – is crucial for managing crises in a way that is as orderly, effective and efficient as possible. Let me conclude my remarks. The euro area is making good progress towards achieving stable and sound foundations. I trust that in October and subsequently in December, the Heads of State or Government will reaffirm their commitment to the irreversibility of the euro by agreeing on a long-term vision for our economic and monetary union. That process has not yet had a fully visible impact on the everyday life of citizens in the countries suffering most from the crisis. I am well aware of the hardship that the current situation entails for many people, especially those whose job is lost or at risk. The adjustment process towards sustainable public finances and a competitive economy can be painful in the short term, both politically and economically. Yet, the reforms are necessary corrections which will bring countries back on the path of sustainable growth. And they also contribute to improve social justice, by fostering tax compliance and limiting rent-seeking by vested interests.I am confident that the euro area and its currently weaker members will emerge from the crisis with stronger and better functioning economies – and that this will be to the benefit of all Europe’s citizens.Thank you very much.Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged. Media contacts </p>",madam chair honour member committe econom monetari affair pleasur back parliament front committe regular exchang view know european central bank ecb recent taken import decis address sever distort govern bond market ecb stand readi undertak appropri condit call outright monetari transact omt provid fulli effect backstop avoid destruct scenario might threaten price stabil euro area omt announc help support financi market confid ecb action help build bridg bridg must clear destin reach destin involv three process first full implement fiscal consolid structur reform enhanc competit second full implement financi sector reform third complet genuin econom monetari union establish singl supervisori mechan ssm key step process today review econom monetari develop sinc juli explain detail rational modal omt end share view one four build block genuin econom monetari union name financi market union let start economi sinc last meet ecb left key interest rate unchang main refinanc rate stand deposit rate margin lend facil econom activ contract second quarter look ahead expect weak econom activ near term gradual recoveri risk outlook downsid main relat tension sever euro area financi market averag inflat euro area stood septemb reflect indirect tax high energi price declin cours under price pressur remain moder given modest econom growth wellanchor longterm inflat expect risk outlook price develop broad balanc monetari analysi paint pictur consist price stabil particular under pace monetari expans remain subdu loan dynam also subdu result weak demand credit also restrict suppli credit euro area countri let explain decis announc ecb govern council septemb outright monetari transact impact financi monetari condit past reduct key ecb interest rate differ consider within euro area exampl countri follow cut key ecb interest rate rate charg bank system credit real economi declin littl countri ecb rate cut fulli pass one reason differ cost bank credit firm inevit link cost market fund bank fear potenti destruct scenario cost fund bank affect asymmetr across euro area mean two firm otherwis ident creditworthi benefit differ extent past cut key ecb interest rate mere locat differ countri distort financ cost hinder smooth function credit market transmiss monetari polici distort keep countri previous describ bad equilibrium distort fall clear within mandat address counter impair monetari polici transmiss preserv singl ecb monetari polici govern council decid undertak outright monetari transact omt intervent govern bond market provid fulli effect backstop avoid destruct scenario might threaten price stabil euro area aim ensur ecb monetari polici stanc transmit even real economi across euro area ecb conduct omt long countri compli strict effect condit attach appropri programm via european financi stabil facil european stabil mechan condit preserv primaci price stabil mandat ensur omt compens lack fiscal consolid condit particular preserv incent govern continu econom fiscal adjust condit fulfil omt success move economi toward might call good equilibrium omt exant unlimit explain uncondit exit omt would take place object achiev failur compli programm omt would take place given programm review would resum review period programm complianc assur consist treati prohibit monetari financ ecb conduct transact secondari market buy investor govern purchas focus particular govern bond remain matur one three year line tradit focus central bank monetari oper ecb accept treatment privat creditor respect bond purchas context omt ecb fulli transpar omt report week total portfolio hold month averag durat hold breakdown countri let turn topic chosen today exchang view name financi market union ecb welcom european commiss propos singl supervisori mechan much line statement euro area summit june look forward work close european parliament field confid excel cooper establish far continu matter financi supervis let focus three issu key set stage new supervisori framework euro area first principl separ monetari polici financi supervis second possibl particip noneuro area member state ssm third account framework first issu separ monetari supervisori function enter unchart territori mani central bank around world includ larg major nation central bank eurosystem combin monetari supervisori function proper arrang prevent monetari polici inappropri affect supervisori role devis sever countri confid establish suitabl arrang euro area draw part experi commiss propos provid solid basi achiev goal supervisori board carri regular supervisori activ perform direct ecb go long way toward avoid possibl conflict interest two function addit examin intern procedur would separ relev workstream support two function second key issu supervisori framework possibl noneuro area member state particip ssm let us first take step back remind key reason build financi market union happen euro area build break vicious circl sovereign bank manifest much acut disrupt monetari union need ssm singl currenc area time clear creat financi market union sustain even strengthen singl market singl currenc singl market key pillar growth prosper europ maintain inde enhanc ecb welcom possibl involv noneuro area member state ssm particip addit member state would provid even stronger boost complet singl market said entiti ecb whose key legal power key decisionmak fora limit euro area impos oblig grant correspond right noneuro area member state rais number legal issu legal servic togeth commiss european council examin close possibl modal particip noneuro area member state within legal constraint statut third key issu supervisori framework one suspect particular close heart ecb account supervisori action citizen europ elect repres independ supervisori function import account two side coin given natur task supervis need oper cooper author notabl fiscal cost concern separ robust mechan account place legitimis high degre independ commiss propos forese particular ssm account european parliament european council question rais timelin begin supervisori task irrespect precis schedul perform supervisori task believ import council regul enter forc envisag januari would allow us start preparatori work swift possibl discuss main aspect ssm financi market union would incomplet without commensur progress toward common resolut regim lack regim increas cost bank failur taxpay also complic handl bank failur especi crossbord case common resolut regim independ european resolut author centr crucial manag crise way order effect effici possibl let conclud remark euro area make good progress toward achiev stabl sound foundat trust octob subsequ decemb head state govern reaffirm commit irrevers euro agre longterm vision econom monetari union process yet fulli visibl impact everyday life citizen countri suffer crisi well awar hardship current situat entail mani peopl especi whose job lost risk adjust process toward sustain public financ competit economi pain short term polit econom yet reform necessari correct bring countri back path sustain growth also contribut improv social justic foster tax complianc limit rentseek vest interest confid euro area current weaker member emerg crisi stronger better function economi benefit europ citizen thank much reproduct permit provid sourc acknowledg media contact,en